1
> Magic Missile
> Chromatic Orb
> Burning Hands
> Protection: Evil
Identification
Shield

2
> Mirror
> Melf
> Snowball					--?
Invis						++
Knock						--?
Web							--?

3
> Skull Trap
Fireball
Haste
Melf Meteor
- Vampiric Touch
Hold Person

4
> Wizards Vision *
> Stone Skin
> Minor Sequencer
> Improved Invis			--
> Mordekeinen Projectiles	++
> Minor Globe of Invulnerability
Dimension Door
Polymorph Self
Greater Malison
Far Sight

5.
> Cone of Cold
> Solar						+
> Spell Immunity
Chaos
Breach

6.
> Contingency
Trollish Fortitude
Mislead						+
Globe of Invulnerability
Improved Haste

7.
> Project Image *
> Spell Sequencer
> PW Stun *
Limited Wish

8.
> Spell Trigger
> Simulacrum

9.
> Spell Trap *
> PW:Kill *
> Chain Contingency
Wish
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
____________________________________________

Fighter/Mage:
1. Magic Missile
2. Mirroir Image
3. Skull Trap
4. Contagion
5. (Weird choice but) Spell Shield
6. Tenser's Tranformation
7. Project Image
8. Spell Triger
9. Time Stop

1. Magic Missile
2. Melf's Acid Arrow
3. Fireball
4. Stoneskin/Minor Sequencer
5. Breach
6. True Sight/Contingency
7. Spell Sequencer/Summon Djinni or Summon Efreeti
8. Protection from Energy/Spell Trigger
9. Energy Drain/Chain Contingency

My picks for a sorcerer are something like the following (roughly in order of when I would pick them):
LVL 1: Sleep (key for BG1; worthless in BG2), Magic Missile, Chromatic Orb, Protection from Petrification or Identify, Find Familiar (if someone knows where a scroll is located in BG1, I would eliminate this and replace with Shield or whichever of the prot pet/ident you didn't pick)
LVL 2: Web, Mirror Image, Remove Fear, Invisibility, Blur (you need Knock if you play without a thief)
LVL 3: Melf's Meteors, Remove Magic, Skull Trap, Dispel Magic, Flame Arrow
LVL 4: Stoneskin. Oh, you have to pick something else? Polymorph Self (slime is 100% magic resistant to frustrate enemy mages), Improved Invisibility, Greater Malison, Teleport Field or Spirit Armor
LVL 5: Breach, Lower Resistance, Spell Immunity, Cloudkill, Sunfire
LVL 6: Protection from Magical Weapons, Contingency, True Sight, Improved Haste, Death Fog
LVL 7: Project Image, Mordenkainen's Sword, Spell Sequencer, Delayed Fireball Blast
LVL 8: Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting, Spell Trigger, Simulcram, Power Word Blind
LVL 9: Chain Contingency, Wish, Time Stop

BG1:
1: Magic Missile, Sleep, Armor
2: Mirror Image, Web
3: Fireball, Dispel Magic, Hold Person
4: Improved Invisibility, Stoneskin
5: Chaos, Breach, Spell Immunity
BG2:
3. Melf's Minute Meteor
4: FIre Shield(s), Secret Word, Greater Malison
5: Lower Resistance 

Magic Missile and Fireball are signature BG spells, so lots of people select them blindly without realizing how bad these spells are.
Anyway the only two spells you absolutely must have are Breach and True Sight. Without having access to them in some way the game becomes almost unbeatable. ( luckily clerics have true sight and there are wands of breach in tob)
fighter/mages and mages have completely different spell selection..


PRISTIN'S TOWER
Spells Guide for Heart of Winter, Icewind Dale
by Avielh Aleczis M. Tolentino 
Version : 0.98 FINAL VERSION
Date Finished : August 20, 2002
---
History :
1. April 5, 2002, v0.3 (92kb)
      - completed most level 1,2,3 spells       
2. April 12, 2002, v0.37 (113kb) 
      - revamped reference method 
      - some level 3 mage spells
      - level 4 and 5 druid spells
      - improved literary (ta-da!) (well, sort of...)
3. April 19, 2002, v0.45 (139kb)
      - level 4 cleric/ mage spells and more
      - new tag format
      - various comment changes
4. April 28, 2002, v0.6 (170kb)
      - correction : detect evil (mage) is level 2
      - more spell data added (but not too many comments yet)
      - many various changes
      - more polishing done (... more needed)
5. May 12, 2002, v0.62 (208kb)
      - brief description of some creator mages
      - addition : BASIC CONCEPTS AND TIPS
      - narrowed some spell reference
      - no new spell but rewrote most of them
6. June 5, 2002, v0.74 (254kb)
      - Made effort to record significant changes
      - Correction : no spell level cap, limit is 30
      - Correction : Force Missile area damage, save = avoid 
      - Added most level 5 spells' data
      - Added Malavon's Rage (7M) to list
      - Burning Hands max out at levl 10
      - Correction : Ghoul Touch requires no attack roll (um, my 
            previous target was convenienly wearing a RING OF FREE
            ACTION... due to his action unbecoming of being my 
            unwilling guinea pig, I sent him to fight 15 Cornugons.)
      - Added attack rate in basic concepts, change example names
      - Mistyped : thorn spray cone is 30 long, 60 wide. 
      - Emotion, Power Word - no more ":"
      - Correction : magic resistance affects only hostile spells
      - Correction : Chill Touch description
      - Various strategy refinements, new comments 
      - Many other forgotten changes
7. June 25, 2002, v.85 (312kb)
      - Changed format: double spaced descriptions, wider between
            sections
      - Slightly changed format of progression lists
      - Most spell data included 
      - Added PARTY HANDLING TIPS
      - Various spelling corrections (again, I won't even bother saying
            next time)
      - Minor correction in Force Missiles' list
      - Many changes... (so much for my effort to record changes)
8. August 20, 2002, v.98 FINAL VERSION (347kb)
      - Added data for Remove Curse (4M), Mordenkainen's Sword (7M),
            Power Word Silence (6M), Monster Summoning V (7M)
      - Many other forgotten changes
      - Filled as much comments as I could





---
GUIDE INTRODUCTION :


- This is (most probably) the final version of this guide. There are
still some spells that don't have comments, but I've been playing this
old game too long and I need the harddisk space for new games (yeah, I
know, I need a new harddisk). The spells that don't have comments are
Know Alignment (2M), Vocalize (2M), Chain Lightning (6M), Darts of Bone
(6M), Death Spell (6M), Invisible Stalker (6M), Shades (6M), Spiritual
Wrath (6C), Whirlwind (6D), Earthquake (7D), Greater Shield of Lathander
(7goodC), Malavon's Rage (7M), Monster Summoning VII (9M), and Power
Word Kill (9M). 


- Icewind Dale is a hack-and-slash roleplaying game from BLACK ISLE 
STUDIOS, INTERPLAY. Based on the ADVANCE DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS 
rules/fantasy world by WIZARDS OF THE COAST. The game software is based
on BIOWARE's Infinity Engine. You can visit them at their web sites at
(as of the day this is written);

      INTERPLAY, http://www.interplay.com
      WIZARDS OF THE COAST, http://www.tsr.com (ok, it's just a link,
            but easier to remember), http://www.wizards.com
      BIOWARE, http://www.bioware.com


- Pristin is the name of my charismatic cleric/mage, my favorite class
in RPGs. I derived it from Pristina (sounds like prishtina), a place in
Kosovo (just heard it from the news), also sounds like pristine or 
"pure". Anyway, I wanted to name the guide "Teacher Seravi's Tower" - 
but it would of sounded silly in the copyright section.


- Data on this guide was gathered from ICEWIND DALE version 1.42. This
includes the HEART OF WINTER expansion set and TRIALS OF THE LUREMASTER
HoW-expansion downloaded from their website. Data on this guide might 
not apply to earlier/other versions.


- I do not play pen and paper AD&D. So I may not understand some AD&D
concepts correctly. Most of my AD&D interpretations are based on what my
friends said, some from people in the GameFAQs message boards and 
ofcourse the manual/game information. 


- Certain Cleric spells can only be cast by Clerics of certain
alignments. "Non-good Clerics" refers to clerics excluding those of good
alignments, "Non-evil Clerics" refers to clerics excluding those of evil
alignments, while "Non-lawful Clerics" refers to clerics excluding those
of lawful alignments.


- The TARGET part of a spell, describes how the spell is cast in the
game and might not necessarily agree with the description. Here are the
some possible values, and what they mean.
      a. CASTER - means that the caster will commence casting as soon as
            you click on the spell icon.
      b. 1 CREATURE - means that the spell cannot be cast unless you 
            point it at a creature.
      c. AREA - means you still need to point the spell somewhere, but
            it can be any area.
      d. ANGLE - the same as in AREA, except the position of the caster
            also plays a part in the execution of the spell.


- Values described such as "4d6", (which means the sum of the values
obtained from throwing 4, six-sided die) is described in this guide as
"4 to 24". That is, a random integer chosen from 4 to 24. By the way,
an integer (in case you forgot), is simply a whole number (without
fractions). Some values here are described with "integer of", it simply
means disregard the decimal fraction of the referred number (ie. Magic
Missile, 3 missiles at level 6 instead of 3.5)


- I prefer to use certain units throughout this guide for the sake of
universality. Here are some conversion ratios for different units that I
assumed/derived. 

      casting speed of 3 means 3/10 of a round
      1 turn = 10 rounds
      8 hours = 45 turns = 450 rounds
      1 hour = 5 and 5/8 turns = 56 and 1/4 rounds
      24 hours = 135 turns = 1350 rounds

      (game/real time comparison, on default AI update setting)
      1 round = 6 seconds, real time
      1 turn = 1 minute 
      1 hour = 5 minutes and 37.5 seconds 
      8 hours = 45 minutes 
      24 hours = 2 hours and 15 minutes 

            The manual gave conflicting data on game / real time ratio.
            So I just followed my instincts and assumed that 1 round is
            6 (real) seconds instead of 7.


- Whenever a list is identified with numbers, it usually means that all
of them apply. If a list is identified with letters, it usually means
only one of them applies. 


- “[3 x casterlevel]" means 3 times the caster's level during the time 
that the spell was cast. Parentheses are used for comments while 
brackets are used for prioritizing numerical expressions.


- AVERAGE damage refers to the average of possible values for damage.
For example, the average of 1 to 6 is [1 + 2 + 3... + 6] / 6 or 3.5,
note that "0" is not a possible value, that's why it's 3.5 not 3. 
MAXIMUM AVERAGE damage is the average damage of a spell at it's highest
possible (ie. level 30).


- Any spell (excluding beneficial spells) can be resisted by magic 
resistance, this is assumed and is not written in the spell's AVOIDANCE
part. Also thieves now have the ability to evade most attack spells,
avoiding their effects completely. The thief's evasion ability improves
with level, almost always avoiding at high levels.


- The "1CD/1M" in "PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M)" simply means that the
spell is a level one Cleric/Druid spell or a level one Mage spell (which
is a little different). I included such tags so that would be easier
to get a good picture of the spells. 
 

- I usually don't give reference to a spell of a higher level than the
spell being described. So most reference on a spell are to spells of the
same level or lower.


- “Fighter-Mage" is a Fighter/Mage, dual or multi-class. Just to 
differentiate it from Fighter OR Mage. (Ok, there are alot of exceptions
because "/" looks better.)


- Spells with names that have colons are written in this guide without
them. For example Emotion: Hopelessness, is written as Emotion 
Hopelessness. Power Word: Stun, is written as Power Word Stun. This is
because the spaces between the colons and the words sometimes
complicate word searches.


- Miscellaneous information on Mages that created certain spells, were
obtained mostly from websites on the internet. And as such, I'm not
really sure about the accuracy of these information. Although I have
tried my best to test most of them for consistency (some people like to
create their own world and spells out of AD&D stuff, as you may know).





---
BASIC CONCEPTS AND TIPS :


01. ATTACK ROLL - When a character attacks a target with a melee or
ranged weapon, a random integer is generated from 1 to 20. This number
is the character's ATTACK ROLL. If this number is equal or higher than a
certain number, then the character hits. If not, then the character
misses. The number the ATTACK ROLL has to overcome is dependent on the
character's THAC0 and the target's AC (THAC0 - AC).

In addition, if ATTACK ROLL is 20, even if [THAC0-AC] is say 30, the
attack will still hit, and it will do double damage (Critical Hit). If
the target is wearing a Helmet (or any item that prevents critical
hits), then the critical hit is avoided, though the target still gets
hit. If the ATTACK ROLL is 1, even if [THAC0-AC] is say -10, the
character will still miss his attack and suffer an additional recover
delay (Critical Miss).

Whenever a spell has a description with "+1 to attack roll" in the game,
I wrote it as bonus to THAC0 instead (just as the game does in the
character's RECORD section). This is because the effect is the same, and
because it can be misleading; because CRITICAL HITS and CRITICAL MISSES
take their que from the unmodified ATTACK ROLL (before bodifications are
made), so having +10 to ATTACK ROLL won't increase your chance of a 
CRITICAL HIT, not one bit.


02. THAC0 - THAC0 is the number that the character's ATTACK ROLL has to
overcome if he was attacking a target with 0 AC (THAC0 is short for TO
HIT ARMOR CLASS 0). This number represents the character's ability to
hit (or hurt) an opponent. The lower the character's THAC0, the more
probable he can hit a target (as his ATTACK ROLL has a lower number to
overcome). A character's THAC0 is seen by clicking on the RECORDS tab
(or press "R"), look at the right side of the screen, just below
PROFICIENCIES. 

      1. The value in the parentheses is the character's actual THAC0.
      2. The value outside is the character's THAC0 without the 
            modifications due to...
            i. the type of weapon the character is holding and how
                  proficient is he in using it
            ii. THAC0 bonus inherent with using magical weapons 

To say a certain item/spell gives a +1 bonus to THAC0 means that it
lowers it by 1, generally increasing the character's chance to hit by
5 percent. The reverse is also true, a -1 penalty to THAC0 increases 
THAC0 by 1, generally decreasing the character's chance to hit by 5
percent. Also, a weapon that has a +1 to hit, is the same as saying it
gives a +1 bonus to THAC0 (lowers it by 1), vice versa. 

Here's a simple way of looking at THAC0 values.

       20 THAC0 = BAD
       10 THAC0 = MEDIOCRE
        0 THAC0 = GOOD
      -10 THAC0 = VERY GOOD

Note that just because your character swings at a target doesn't mean
he attempted an attack, a character's number of attacks per round is
displayed just below THAC0. Characters with melee weapons usually 
(especially non-fighters) make cosmetic swings that are not actually 
real attempts. This doesn't happen with ranged weapons though, when you
see a character shoot an arrow, it's a real attempt.


03. NUMBER OF ATTACKS - A character's NUMBER OF ATTACKS score is just
below his THAC0. It represents the number of physical attacks the
character can do per round. For the meanwhile, I'll just refer to this
value as ATTACK RATE (easier to explain that way, and sounds more 
RTS-ish), and refer to RATE OF FIRE as BASE ATTACK RATE.

All classes have a BASE ATTACK RATE of 1 (1 attack per round) when using
melee weapons. Ranged weapons on the other hand have different values;
      a. Darts have a BASE ATTACK RATE of 3. 
      b. Longbows, Shortbows have a BASE ATTACK RATE of 2. 
      c. Heavy Crossbows, Light Crossbows, Throwing Axes, Throwing
            Daggers have a BASE ATTACK RATE of 1.

If a character is using a weapon that he is not proficient with (0 
proficiency points), his ATTACK RATE is equal to the weapon's BASE
ATTACK RATE (regardless of any other bonus listed below).

Fighters, Rangers and Paladins gain an additional .5 to their ATTACK
RATE starting at level 7. They gain an addition .5 starting at level 13,
for a total of +1. So a level 15 Ranger who is proficient (1 proficiency
point) in using darts, has an ATTACK RATE of 4 (3 (BASE ATTACK RATE) +
.5 (level 7) + .5 (level 13)) when using them. 2 if Mace (1 + .5 + .5),
3 if Longbow (2 + .5 + .5). If he is however not proficient with that
weapon, his ATTACK RATE is simply the weapon's BASE ATTACK RATE.

Furthermore, Warriors (Fighters/Rangers/Paladins) can specialize (2 
proficiency points) in a weapon type, giving them an additional .5 to
their ATTACK RATE. So a level 10 Paladin specializing in Large Swords
has an ATTACK RATE of 2 (1 (BASE ATTACK RATE) + .5 (level 7) + .5 
(Specialized)). If he is level 14, then his ATTACK RATE is 2.5 (1 (BASE
ATTACK RATE) + .5 (level 7) + .5 (level 13) + .5 (Specialized)). If he 
is specializing in Longbows and is level 14, then his ATTACK RATE is 3.5
(2 (BASE ATTACK RATE) + .5 (level 7) + .5 (level 13) + .5 
(Specialized)).

Fighters (Rangers, Paladins, multiclass Fighters not included - they can
only reach Specialized) can be a Grandmaster (5 points of proficiency)
with a weapon type, giving him a whopping +1.5 to his ATTACK RATE due to
proficiency. So a level 16 Fighter with Grandmastery in Axes, has an
ATTACK RATE of 3.5 (1 (BASE) + .5 (Level 7) + .5 (Level 13) + 1.5
(Grandmastery)). A character cannot be a Grandmaster with any ranged
weapon (maximum of 3 points (Master) only). There is no difference
between the bonuses to ATTACK RATE due to Specialized (2 points),
Master (3 points) and High Master (4 points); five is the magic number.

The maximum value of the ATTACK RATE is 5. RIGHTEOUS WRATH OF THE 
FAITHFUL (5C) can only add up to that value, no more. From there, HASTE
(3M) can double the attack rate (though it is not displayed) up to 10
(which is I think the maximum allowed by the BIOWARE INFINITY ENGINE),
only a Haste effect can do that (increase ATTACK RATE over 5).


04. AC - Armor Class. This number represents a character's ability to
avoid or avoid taking damage from an attack. The lower this number is,
the better a character is in avoiding physical attacks. This number is
seen by right-clicking on a character's portrait, it's the top number at
the right side. Good AC makes the number that an attacker's ATTACK ROLL
has to overcome (THAC0 - AC) higher. A +1 bonus to AC lowers it by 1,
generally increasing your chance to avoid an attack by 5 percent. 
Vice-versa.

Here's a simple way of at looking AC values.

       10 AC = BAD
        0 AC = MEDIOCRE
      -10 AC = GOOD
      -20 AC = VERY GOOD

When a character using a ranged weapon (or no weapon) is attacked in 
melee, the attacking character gets (something like) a +4 bonus to hit.
I could'nt find this in the manual, but I know it's true. I just don't
remember where I heard it. Anyway it doesn't hurt to switch to a melee
weapon when attacked in melee, you should do so even if the defending
character has no intention of actually striking back.


05. BASE AC - A character's BASE AC is his original AC before
modifications are taken into account. Base AC usually depends on the
character's body armor, better armor gives lower BASE AC. A character
can only have one BASE AC, if he has 2 item(s) and/or spell(s) that give
different values, the better (lower) one will take effect. Casting
Spirit Armor (1AC) on a character wearing Plate Mail Armor (3AC), will
set his BASE AC to 1.


06. SAVING THROWS - The concept of SAVING THROWS is similar to ATTACK
ROLL, except that SAVING THROWS are more specific. A character's SAVING
THROWS are also seen in the RECORDS page, just below AI SCRIPTS. 

      1. The immediate numbers are the saving throws.
      2. The numbers in the parentheses shows any modification to the 
            throw. A -3 means that the corresponding saving throw is
            supposed to be higher by 3 if not for some item or spell.

The lower the SAVING THROW values are, the better. When an offensive
spell that has a SAVING THROW (a possibility of avoidance whether 
complete or partial if a SAVING THROW is made) is cast on a character, a
random integer is generated from 1 to 20. If this number is equal or
higher than the character's corresponding SAVING THROW value, then the
avoidance takes place. Example, if Charm Person is cast on a character
with a SAVING THROW VS SPELLS of 12, then that character has a 45
percent (save:12,13,14... 20/ fail:11,10,9... 1) (or 9 out of 20) chance
of making the save. In the case of Charm Person, a save means complete
avoidance. 

A +1 bonus to SAVING THROWs lowers every SAVING THROW value by 1,
increasing the chance to make a save by 5 percent. A -1 penalty to
SAVING THROWs increases every SAVING THROW value by 1, decreasing the
chance to make a save by 5 percent. When a spell cast has a SAVING THROW
with a -2 penalty, it means that the target's SAVING THROW is
considered higher by 2 points against that spell, decreasing the chance
to make a save by 10 percent. 

Some spells give saving throw bonus to specific types of attack (other
than the default choices) like against fear (bless), against magic 
(spirit armor) or non-magical (barkskin) attacks. This refers to the
type of attack/spell rather than a another saving throw value. For 
example, saving throw against any attack (with a saving throw) that
causes fear, receive a +1 bonus if bless is in effect.

Here's a simple way of at looking SAVING THROW values.

      20 = VERY BAD
      10 = MEDIOCRE
       0 = VERY GOOD
     -10 = You're a regular Wizardslayer

Additional information : 
      - Dwarves recieve a +1 bonus to saving throws against Paralyse/
            Poison/Death, Rod/Staff/Wand, and Spells for every 3.5
            points of constitution.
      - Halflings and Gnomes receive a +1 bonus to saving throws against
            Rod/Staff/Wand, and Spells for every 3.5 points of
            constitution.
      - Paladins receive a +2 bonus to all saving throws.
      - Saving throws get better with level, Fighters(/Rangers/Paladins)
            have the best saving throw improvement.
      - Characters with 15 and above wisdom have (supposedly) a bonus to
            saving throws against magic that attack the mind. +1 at 15,
            +2 at 16, +3 at 17 and a maximum of +4 at 18.


07. RESISTANCE - A character's resistance nullifies part of the damage
of a specific type of attack. These values are considered percentage
values. A character with 50 FIRE RESISTANCE, suffers only half (resists 
50 percent) of all fire damage inflicted on him. The exception to this
rule is MAGIC RESISTANCE. Any magic directed at a character with 50
MAGIC RESISTANCE has a 50 percent chance of not affecting him at all. If
Fireball is cast at a character with 50 MAGIC RESISTANCE and 50 FIRE
RESISTANCE, there is is a 50 percent chance the character avoids any
effects at all, if it does affect him, he takes only half of damage. 
Resistance bonus from different spells are generally cummulative (up to
127 for FIRE, COLD, ELEC. 100 for MAGIC).

Certain types of creatures are resistant/immune to particular attacks.
The undead (living dead - zombies, skeletons, mummies, etc) for example
are generally immune to enchantment spells. Fire elementals would
naturally be immune to fire damage (but vulnerable to cold). Poisonous
creatures are naturally resistant or immune to poison. Some powerful
creatures cannot be damaged by weapons that are not powerful enough, 
Yxunomei for example can only be hurt by +2 or better weapons.


08. MEMORIZING SPELLS (and other stuff) - Spellcasters must first choose
what spells they intend to use, memorize them, before they can cast
them. Why ? Because Mages don't actually have powers, they need to study
and memorize how to form energies into spells. And since each spell is
quite complicated, they can only prepare for a limited amount. Clerics
don't actually cast spells they pray to their god, and since they can't
ask everything at once, they need to choose too. And Druids... okay I
don't know, but you get the picture. To memorize a spell, click on
caster, then press either "W" (mage) or "P" (cleric, druid), click on
the known spell list until the memorize slots are filled, then rest
uninterrupted for at least 8 hours. By the way, Fighter/Mages,
Cleric/Mages, Thief/Mages, Fighter/Cleric/Mages and Fighter/Thief/Mages
cannot cast spells while wearing any body armor, with the exception of
robes.

Some magical items have charges of spells. The WAND OF ARMORY for
example can cast Shield or Ghost Armor on the wielder. This is used by
putting the wand on one of the QUICKITEM slots in the inventory, then
click on it outside (return to game). To choose which spell to the wand
uses, right click on it (quickitem, outside), then choose. Some items
that have charges are worn, not placed in the QUICKITEM slot. If you
want to use MANTLE OF THE COMING STORM's Free Action spell, wear the
item, then go outside (return to game), click on USE ITEM, then the
spell. The number of charges an item has is displayed on the item's
icon. When the all the charges are used up, the item can longer perform
that ability. You can recharge the item though by selling it and buying
it again (ie. Sister Caliana, Temple of Ilmater - buys most stuff). Some
items such as the BLUR DECK will disappear when all the charges are used
up, so make sure you never use all of an item's charge. 

A potion is not a rechargable item. Once you use it, it's gone for good.
So keep them for emergencies. Some potions you should definitely keep
are ANTIDOTEs (for poison), MUMMY'S TEA (for disease), POTION OF GENIUS
(learning new spells above 18) and any potion that increases a thief's
picpocket skill. The effects of some potions are permanent such as with
POTION OF STRENGTH TRANSFERENCE, so be careful.

Bard Songs are not memorized and do not have a limited charge, the only
catch is that the bard cannot do anything while he's singing. If he does
anything (like switching weapons) the song is broken, and it takes about
a second or two to get it going again. Also bard songs can only affect
creatures within a certain range. You can change what song he sings 
(when he gains more) by right-clicking on the sing (harp) icon.


09. ACQUIRING SPELLS - Clerics and Druids automatically acquire spells
with level. Mages must first copy spells from scrolls. To copy a spell,
put a scroll in the mage's inventory, save the game. Right click on the
scroll then press WRITE MAGIC. The chance to learn spells is directly
proportional to the mage's intelligence and level, and inversely
proportional to the spell's level. If the mage fails to learn the spell,
just reload the game. If WRITE MAGIC doesn't appear, that means that the
mage already knows the spell or that he has reached the maximum number
of spells (per spell level) that he can learn. If this happens simply
drink a POTION OF GENIUS or POTION OF MIND FOCUSING until his
intelligence 19 or above (no limit), then try again.

Note that not all scrolls can be learned, Protection Scrolls (ie 
PROTECTION FROM COLD, PROTECTION FROM ACID) cannot be learned. They are
used by putting them in the QUICKITEM slot, they can be used by anybody.
Priest Scrolls on the other hand, are like Protection Scrolls, except
they can only be used by Priests (Clerics, Druids). Both Protection 
Scrolls and Priest Scrolls, disappear after use. Your Mage can also use
Mage scrolls like that, but WHY ON EARTH would you want to do that?!!


10. PARTY RECOMMENDATION : If you want to be able to try as much magic
as you can, here's my party recommendation. I have also included names
and filled most data just in case you can't think of any. You can always
change the name later on by exporting and importing (with a different
name). You export characters by going to the RECORD tab, then press
EXPORT. Some items cannot be exported so make sure to drop those items
before exporting. You can import characters by going to the character
arbitration tab (or press "C") then modify > delete exported character
> create new character > import.
       
      1. Gender : Male
         Portrait : first to the right/ 32nd to the left 
         Race : Dwarf
         Class : Fighter
         Alignment : Neutral Good
         Abilities : 
               Strength     : 18/91 or higher
               Dexterity    : 17
               Constitution : 19 
               Wisdom       : Not less than 8
         Skills : 
               Procifiency : 2 Axe, 2 Hammers (hold shield in other
                      hand
         Appearance : no change
         Voice : MALE_FIGHTER_2
         Name : Kurdran

            The problem with spellcasters is that they're too weak. 
            That's why you need someone to be your tank. He stands in
            the way, so enemies attack him instead. He has good HP,
            saving throws bonus, and can wear good armor. Cat's Grace
            can fix the dexterity penalty. 

      2. Gender : Female
         Appearance : 7nth to the right/ 13nth to the left
         Race : Human
         Class : Cleric
         Alignment : Neutral Good
         Abilities :
               Wisdom       : 18
               Constitution : 16 (no effect above 16 - not fighter)
               Strength     : 18
               Dexterity    : not less than 7
         Skills : 
               Prociciency : Maces, Missiles Weapons (shield in other
                     hand)
               Memorized : Bless, Cure Light Wounds, Protection from
                     Evil (can be changed anytime)
         Appearance : no change
         Voice : HOW_FEMALE_2
         Name : Lenneth

            Her magic consists mainly of healing, combat support and 
            protective spells. Unlike the other spellcasters, she can
            wear the heaviest armors and still be able to use spells.
            She can also turn (rebuke) any undead creature. Note
            that there are some spells that only evil or neutral Clerics
            can use. 

      3. Gender : Male
         Portrait : 14nth to the right/ 19nth to the left
         Race : Elf 
         Class : Multi-class > Fighter/Thief
         Alignment : Chaotic Good
         Abilities : 
               Strength     : 18/91 or higher
               Dexterity    : 19
               Constitution : 17
               Wisdom       : Not less than 8 (if possible, else just
                     keep it as high as you can)
         Skills : 
               Thief skills : place anywhere except Pick Pockets
               Proficiency : 2 Bows, 2 Large Swords
         Appearance : no change
         Voice : HOW_MALE_3
         Name : Garrett 

            Basically he disarm traps and pick locks. He is also your
            main ranged attacker. He is good at backstabbing and can
            substitute as your tank. He cannot use thief skills when
            wearing body armor better than Studded Leather. (Note that
            the experience cap in HoW is level 30 (in all classes),
            regardless of whether being single or multi-class in a
            profession.)
  
      4. Gender : Female
         Portrait : 17nth to the right/ 3rd to the left
         Race : Human
         Class : Druid
         Alignment : True Neutral (no choice)
         Abilities : 
               Wisdom       : 18
               Dexterity    : 18
               Constitution : not less than 7 
               Strength     : not less than 8 (50 lbs carry capacity) 
         Skills :
               Procifiency : Daggers, Missile Weapons (Buckler in other
                     hand)
               Memorized : Entangle, Sunscorch, Curse (can be changed 
                     anytime)
         Appearance : no change
         Voice : HOW_FEMALE_1
         Name : Storm

            Her magic consists mainly of healing, summon and attack
            spells. She has the best summon spells and has alot of
            spells that can do alot of damage over time or with large
            quantities. She can shapeshift (later) into different
            animals/ elementals making her less dependent on fighter 
            support than Mages or Bards. She'll also become immune to
            poison, and never suffers fatigue later on.

      5. Gender : Male
         Portrait : 5th to the right/ 28th to the left
         Race : Half-elf
         Class : Bard
         Alignment : Chaotic Neutral
         Abilities : 
               Charisma     : 18
               Intelligence : 16 or higher (NOT A POINT LOWER!!)
               Dexterity    : 18
               Strength     : 14 or higher (most new items tend to go to
                            him) 
               Constitution : not less than 7 
               Wisdom       : not less than 8
         Skills : 
               Procifiency : Great Swords, Crossbows 
         Appearance : no change
         Voice : MALE_FIGHTER_5
         Name : Maverick

            He can sing songs that enhance your party and is the only
            one who can use bard instruments. Some magic produced by
            instruments are unique. He levels up quickly so he is better
            at casting certain spells than a mage. He is your party's 
            best diplomat. He can also pickpocket. He cannot cast spells
            while wearing body armor, or pickpocket while wearing body
            armor better than Studded Leather. 

      6. Gender : Male
         Portrait : 27nth to the right/ 6th to the left
         Race : Human
         Class : Mage
         Alignment : Lawful Good
         Abilities : 
               Intelligence : 18
               Dexterity    : 18
               Constitution : 16 (no effect above 16 - not fighter)
               Strength     : not less than 8 (50 lbs carry capacity)
               Wisdom       : not less than 8
         Skills : 
               Proficiency : Missile Weapons (hold stave or dagger in
                     other quickweapon slot)
               Known spells : Sleep, Armor
               Memorized : Sleep (can be changed anytime)
         Appearance : no change
         Voice : MALE_MAGE_5
         Name : Gandalf 

            He has by far the most number of (type of) spells. He has 
            attack, summons, combat support, protective, miscellaneous
            spells. What he doesn't have are healing spells. He can't
            wear any body armor, but he can kick serious butt.


11. PARTY HANDLING TIPS (for those not used to parties composed mostly
of spellcasters)

      - Basic Rule : Just PAUSE it. When you sight an enemy, an enemy 
      casts a spell, when a partiicular enemy you're attacking just
      died, when a weak character said "ouch", if you to see how much
      life an enemy has, or what spell they are casting, want to check
      your inventory, or if you just don't know what to do yet... just
      PAUSE (spacebar) it first. (Ofcourse, there's always the "Just
      SAVE it rule"...)

      - Arrange the portraits, toughest to weakest, from top to bottom.
      This is because most formations, have the top in front and the
      bottom last. To use formations, select concerned members,
      right-click and hold on the ground (you'll see the formation) then
      move the mouse to the direction you want to face, and let go. 
      There are more formations available by right-clicking on any of
      the preset ones. 
      
      - When enemies are in sight, the first thing you have to do (next
      to pausing, and stopping the party if they're moving) is to send
      your toughest character (Fighter) towards it. This is so that all,
      if not most of them attack him, sparing the weak characters and
      freeing them to cast spells/attack with ranged weapons unhindered.
      I recommend having the Fighter to wear the best defensive items
      because of this (if you remember, good body armor have low Base
      AC). 

      - When enemies are coming from 2 or more directions, send the 
      Fighter towards the stronger group, the second toughest (Cleric or
      Fighter-Thief (with armor)) towards the second strongest group,
      etc. If enemies are already close, you can have the party (except
      the Fighter) retreat instead to create the distance. If there is
      no room to move back, you can also move through one of the enemy
      groups and reform on their rear; sure it's messy, but at least the
      enemy will come from one direction.

      - If a weak character is being attacked in melee, you can make him
      run around in circles or back and forth to minimize damage. You
      can make use of SHIFT (waypoint) command for convenience. If you
      have tougher characters free/available, you can make 2 of them
      stand next to each other then have the weak character walk through
      them (which he will automatically "bump", letting him pass through
      and (hopefully) stopping the pursuer). Ofcourse you can always use
      protection spells.

      - You can use "0" (zero) key to select the first 3 portraits, this
      is used so that you don't have to deselect (CTRL) the Bard (if
      you've used SELECT ALL) to keep him singing. With this you can
      have the Fighter (melee), Fighter-Thief (range), Cleric (range) do
      most physical combat while the weak characters stay back (equipped
      with melee weapons for added security (and to look good)).

      - Another way to do it, is to press "7" (first 2), attack, then
      "8" (second 2), attack. That is, Fighter (melee), Fighter-Thief
      (range), Cleric (range or melee), Druid (range) to do most
      physical combat, Bard and Mage behind with melee. This is better
      than the one above, but more inconvenient. You can also click on
      SELECT ALL, then deselect (CTRL 9 or CTRL then click portraits)
      the Bard and the Mage, whichever you prefer.

      - If many creatures are close to each other, and you can't target/
      see a particular target because other creatures are blocking your
      view. Pause the game, cast the spell on (what you perceive is) it,
      right-click (to cancel cursor) and wait (for the name/ID to show
      up). If it's your target, then unpause; if it isn't, then try on
      another spot.

      - A convenient way of killing many enemies on a map, is to send
      your Cleric with a SANCTUARY (1C) spell or Fighter-Thief 
      (stealthed) to scout the map, preferably with Boots of Haste item.
      As soon as he/she's seen enough, he/she attacks (breaking the 
      Sanctuary/stealth) then runs back through all the enemies towards
      the party, triggering all the enemies to follow. This way, you can
      maximize/conserve your area-effect spells (when you ambush them
      all at once). Ofcourse, this only works if your Fighter-Thief/
      Cleric manages to stay alive.

      - Taking que from the above tip, when exploring tight areas (or
      just plain exploring), send your Fighter alone. If he encounters
      a large enemy force, just have him retreat to the others (where
      they could cast spells in advance, if necessesary). This way, you
      minimize your weak characters' exposure. 

      - Items sold by Orrick the Grey in Kuldahar change in chaper 2,
      then change again in chapter 4. Because of this, I would advice to
      buy as much mage scrolls as you like to learn before the next
      chapter because mage scrolls are few (as you have to give them
      both to your Mage AND Bard). Also, don't sell items to Orrick if
      possible until chapter 4. Oh, and most non-scroll items Orrick
      sells (such as Simmering Sash in chapter 2) cannot be found 
      elsewhere in the game.

      - Multiple area-effect spells can really slow the graphics. You
      can turn TRANSLUCENT SPELL EFFECTS off (options > graphics) to
      speed things up. You can also turn on the OPENGL ACCELERATION 
      (config.exe in IWD directory) if your video card supports it, in
      my case though, it sometimes drastically slows everything down
      (memory leak?) and only a reboot can fix it. If you do turn it on,
      try to avoid pressing QUICKLOAD (press OPTION > LOAD GAME
      instead), as sometimes, things from the last game is taken into
      the loaded game (*hint*hint*that's a bad sign). Also you could try
      removing resident anti-virus programs while playing (McAfee
      Viruscan 6 really slows my 900 mhz PC, especially loading times,
      scanning for 1.7 billion viruses and all).    

      - GETTING STARTED TIP : Orcs with Ogre in Easthaven Cave
           1. Form at opening far from them.
           2. Send Fighter (to lure them) then retreat towards the
                 others.
           3. As Fighter comes back, Druid casts ENTANGLE (1D) at front
                 area, Cleric casts BLESS (1CD) at party, Druid or
                 Cleric casts CURSE (1CD) at enemies, Mage casts SLEEP
                 (1M) at enemies, Bard sings BALLAD OF THREE HEROES.
           4. Attack with ranged weapons (except Bard), one by one. 
                 Fighter slightly at front to engage any melee attacker.





---
SPELL INDEX :


L1-01 : Armor
L1-02 : Bless
L1-03 : Burning Hands
L1-04 : Cause Light Wounds 
L1-05 : Charm Person
L1-06 : Chill Touch
L1-07 : Chromatic Orb
L1-08 : Color Spray
L1-09 : Command 
L1-10 : Cure Light Wounds
L1-11 : Curse
L1-12 : Detect Evil (Cleric, Druid)
L1-13 : Entangle
L1-14 : Friends
L1-15 : Grease 
L1-16 : Identify
L1-17 : Infravision
L1-18 : Larloch's Minor Drain
L1-19 : Magic Missile
L1-20 : Magical Stone
L1-21 : Protection from Evil (Mage)
L1-22 : Protection from Evil (Cleric, Druid)
L1-23 : Remove Fear
L1-24 : Sanctuary
L1-25 : Shield
L1-26 : Shillelagh
L1-27 : Shocking Grasp
L1-28 : Sleep
L1-29 : Suncorch

L2-01 : Agannazar's Scorcher
L2-02 : Aid
L2-03 : Alicorn Lance
L2-04 : Barkskin
L2-05 : Beast Claw
L2-06 : Blindness
L2-07 : Blur
L2-08 : Cause Moderate Wounds
L2-09 : Cat's Grace
L2-10 : Chant
L2-11 : Charm Person or Mammal
L2-12 : Cure Moderate Wounds
L2-13 : Decastave
L2-14 : Detect Evil (Mages)
L2-15 : Detect Invisibility
L2-16 : Draw Upon Holy Might
L2-17 : Find Traps
L2-18 : Flame Blade
L2-19 : Goodberry
L2-20 : Ghoul Touch
L2-21 : Hold Person
L2-22 : Horror
L2-23 : Invisibility
L2-24 : Knock
L2-25 : Know Alignment (Cleric, Druid)
L2-26 : Know Alignment (Mage)
L2-27 : Luck
L2-28 : Melf's Acid Arrow
L2-29 : Mirror Image
L2-30 : Protection from Petrification
L2-31 : Resist Fear
L2-32 : Resist Fire/Resist Cold
L2-33 : Silence 15' Radius 
L2-34 : Snilloc's Snowball Swarm 
L2-35 : Slow Poison
L2-36 : Spiritual Hammer
L2-37 : Stinking Cloud
L2-38 : Strength
L2-39 : Vocalize
L2-40 : Web

L3-01 : Animate Dead (Cleric)
L3-02 : Call Lightning
L3-03 : Cause Disease
L3-04 : Circle of Bones
L3-05 : Cloudburst
L3-06 : Cure Disease
L3-07 : Dire Charm
L3-08 : Dispel Magic (Cleric)
L3-09 : Dispel Magic (Mage)
L3-10 : Exaltation
L3-11 : Fireball
L3-12 : Flame Arrow
L3-13 : Ghost Armor
L3-14 : Glyph of Warding
L3-15 : Haste
L3-16 : Hold Animal
L3-17 : Hold Person
L3-18 : Holy Smite
L3-19 : Icelance
L3-20 : Invisibility Purge
L3-21 : Lance of Disruption
L3-22 : Lightning Bolt
L3-23 : Miscast Magic
L3-24 : Mold Touch
L3-25 : Monster Summoning I
L3-26 : Moonblade
L3-27 : Non-detection
L3-28 : Prayer
L3-29 : Protection from Fire
L3-30 : Protection from Normal Missiles
L3-31 : Remove Curse (Cleric)
L3-32 : Remove Paralysis
L3-33 : Rigid Thinking
L3-34 : Skull Trap
L3-35 : Slow
L3-36 : Spike Growth
L3-37 : Storm Shell
L3-38 : Strength of One
L3-39 : Unholy Blight
L3-40 : Vampiric Touch

L4-01 : Animal Summoning I
L4-02 : Beltyn's Burning Blood
L4-03 : Blood Rage
L4-04 : Cause Serious Wounds
L4-05 : Cloak of Fear
L4-06 : Cloud of Pestilence
L4-07 : Confusion (Mage)
L4-08 : Cure Serious Wounds
L4-09 : Defensive Harmony
L4-10 : Dimension Door
L4-11 : Emotion Courage
L4-12 : Emotion Fear
L4-13 : Emotion Hope
L4-14 : Emotion Hopelessness
L4-15 : Free Action
L4-16 : Giant Insect
L4-17 : Greater Malison
L4-18 : Ice Storm
L4-19 : Improved Invisibility
L4-20 : Mental Domination
L4-21 : Minor Globe of Invulnerability
L4-22 : Monster Summoning II
L4-23 : Mordenkainen's Force Missiles
L4-24 : Neutralize Poison
L4-25 : Otiluke's Resilient Sphere
L4-26 : Poison
L4-27 : Produce Fire
L4-28 : Protection from Evil, 10 Radius
L4-29 : Protection from Lightning
L4-30 : Recitation
L4-31 : Remove Curse (Mage)
L4-32 : Shadow Monsters
L4-33 : Shout
L4-34 : Smashing Wave
L4-35 : Spirit Armor
L4-36 : Star Metal Cudgel
L4-37 : Static Charge
L4-38 : Stoneskin
L4-39 : Thorn Spray
L4-40 : Unfailing Endurance
L4-41 : Vitriolic Sphere
L4-42 : Wall of Moonlight

L5-01 : Animal Rage
L5-02 : Animal Summoning II
L5-03 : Animate Dead (Mage)
L5-04 : Cause Critical Wounds
L5-05 : Champion's Strength
L5-06 : Chaos
L5-07 : Chaotic Commands
L5-08 : Cloudkill
L5-09 : Cone of Cold
L5-10 : Contact Other Plane
L5-11 : Conjure Earth Elemental (Mage)
L5-12 : Conjure Fire Elemental (Mage)
L5-13 : Conjure Water Elemental
L5-14 : Cure Critical Wounds
L5-15 : Demi-shadow Monsters
L5-16 : Domination
L5-17 : Flame Strike
L5-18 : Feeblemind
L5-19 : Greater Command
L5-20 : Hold Monster
L5-21 : Insect Plague 
L5-22 : Lower Resistance
L5-23 : Magic Resistance
L5-24 : Monster Summoning III
L5-25 : Raise Dead
L5-26 : Righteous Wrath of the Faithful
L5-27 : Shield of Lathander
L5-28 : Shroud of Flame
L5-29 : Slay Living
L5-30 : Spike Stones
L5-31 : Summon Shadow
L5-32 : Sunfire
L5-33 : Undead Ward

L6-01 : Animal Summoning III
L6-02 : Antimagic Shell
L6-03 : Blade Barrier
L6-04 : Chain Lightning
L6-05 : Conjure Fire Elemental (Druid)
L6-06 : Darts of Bone
L6-07 : Death Fog
L6-08 : Death Spell
L6-09 : Disintigrate
L6-10 : Entropy Shield
L6-11 : Fire Seeds
L6-12 : Flesh to Stone
L6-13 : Globe of Invulnerability
L6-14 : Harm 
L6-15 : Heal 
L6-16 : Invisible Stalker
L6-17 : Lich Touch
L6-18 : Monster Summoning IV
L6-19 : Otiluke's Freezing Sphere
L6-20 : Power Word Silence
L6-21 : Shades
L6-22 : Sol's Searing Orb
L6-23 : Soul Eater
L6-24 : Spiritual Wrath
L6-25 : Stone to Flesh
L6-26 : Tenser's Transformation
L6-27 : Trollish Fortitude
L6-28 : Whirlwind

L7-01 : Acid Storm
L7-02 : Confusion (Cleric)
L7-03 : Conjure Earth Elemental (Druid)
L7-04 : Creeping Doom
L7-05 : Destruction
L7-06 : Finger of Death
L7-07 : Fire Storm
L7-08 : Earthquake
L7-09 : Greater Shield of Lathander
L7-10 : Holy Word
L7-11 : Impervious Sanctity of the Mind
L7-12 : Malavon's Rage
L7-13 : Mass Invisibility
L7-14 : Mist of Eldath
L7-15 : Monster Summoning V
L7-16 : Mordenkainen's Sword
L7-17 : Power Word Stun
L7-18 : Prismatic Spray
L7-19 : Resurrection 
L7-20 : Seven Eyes
L7-21 : Stalker
L7-22 : Suffocate
L7-23 : Sunray 
L7-24 : Symbol of Hopelessness
L7-25 : Symbol of Pain
L7-26 : Unholy Word

L8-01 : Abi-Dalzim's Horrid Wilting
L8-02 : Great Shout
L8-03 : Incendiary Cloud
L8-04 : Iron Body
L8-05 : Mind Blank
L8-06 : Monster Summoning VI
L8-07 : Power Word Blind

L9-01 : Monster Summoning VII
L9-02 : Power Word Kill





---
LEVEL 1 SPELLS


L1-01 : ARMOR 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Creates a magical field of force around the caster's body equal
      to the strength of a scalemail armor. While in effect, the 
      caster's base AC is set to 6. 
Duration : 506.25 rounds (9 hours) 
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 1
      2. Tomb in main burial site, Vale of Shadows
      3. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : A very valuable early spell, used to provide excellent
      protection to your "naked" Mage. This spell will have no effect if
      your Mage's base AC is already better than 6. This should be cast
      right after resting because of the spell's long duration. This
      spell (unlike real armor) does not prevent spellcasting or the use
      of thief skills. See also SHIELD (1M).


L1-02 : BLESS 
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Raises the moral of allies within 25 feet of cast point.
            1. Affected creatures gain a +1 bonus to THAC0.
            2. Gains a +1 bonus to saving throws vs fear. 
Duration : 6 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 1, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 6
Comments : An area wide spell that makes your party better at hitting
      their opponents, and (I assume) make it less likely that they
      panic in combat. This is an excellent early spell that brings
      noticable results. However later on, this spell is one of the last
      spells to be cast in combat because of its fixed short duration. 
      It is also used simply to make not-so-easy battles easier and help 
      conserve hitpoints for harder fights. See also REMOVE FEAR (1CD).


L1-03 : BURNING HANDS 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : Angle 
Range : 5 feet
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Fire bursts from caster's fingetips forming an arc; creatures
      within 5 feet and 120 degrees angle in front of the caster suffer 
      [casterlevel x 2] + [1 to 3] fire damage. This spell maxes out at
      level 10 with a maximum average damage of 22.  
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to take only half of damage  
Obtained from : 
      1. Opened tomb, east, first level of main burial site, Vale of
            Shadows
Comments : A cheap, area-effect, Troll-killing spell. This spell can be
      used to kill trolls or inflict damage on creatures immune to
      non-magical weapons. See also SUNSCORCH (1D).


L1-04 : CAUSE LIGHT WOUNDS (Reverse of CURE LIGHT WOUNDS)
Spell : Non-good Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The caster touches the target then casts this spell, causing 8
      magic damage.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to suffer only half damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 1
Comments : A very weak attack spell. This spell is hard to use because
      it has a long casting time, and because it doesn't do alot of
      damage. This spell also doesn't work on non-living creatures,
      including the undead. MAGICAL STONE (1C) is alot better than this
      spell. 


L1-05 : CHARM PERSON 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 bipedal human, demihuman or humanoid. Target must be man-size
      or smaller. Possible target includes Dwarves, Elves, Gnolls
      Gnomes, Goblins, Half-elves, Halflings, Half-orcs, Hobgoblins,
      Humans, Lizard Men, Orcs, Troglodytes and others.
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Target regards the caster as a trusted friend and obeys 
      instructions without question. 
Duration : 10 rounds or until target is attacked by any of the player's 
      forces
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect 
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
Comments : A powerful spell against people. It's usually best to send
      charmed creatures to go fight enemies to their deaths, keep them
      away from vulnerable party members. Charmed creatures can only
      attack using their default weapons, you cannot order them to cast
      spells or use thieving spells, etc. Charmed creatures are 
      considered friendlies and spells like BLESS (1CD) will affect
      them. Charm person is considered a hostile spell, friendly
      creatures you charmed will turn hostile afterwards. Elves have a
      90% resistance against this spell, half-elves: 30%. Creatures 
      affected by PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M) are immune to this
      spell.


L1-06 : CHILL TOUCH 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Caster's hands glows with blue energy that attacks the life 
      force of any creature the caster touches. 
            1. Victims hit by the caster receive a -1 penalty to THAC0
                  for 56.25 rounds (or hour). This effect is 
                  cummulative per hit.
            2. They also suffer 1 to 4 (average of 2.5) cold damage, per
                  hit.
Duration : [casterlevel x 3] rounds 
Avoidance : Not applicable 
Obtain from : 
      1. Main tomb, fourth burial site, Vale of Shadows
Comments : A spell that degrades THAC0. You need to actually hit a
      target in melee combat to affect affect them. The THAC0 penalty is
      cummulative, hitting a creature 5 times will give it a -5 THAC0
      penalty. This spell is best learned by Bards (as there is only 1
      Chill Touch scroll in the game), who can make better use of it
      with TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION (6M) because they level up quickly
      and can wear Chainmails. See also SHILLELAGH (1D).


L1-07 : CHROMATIC ORB 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time :  .1 round
Effect : Creates a 4-inch diameter sphere that flies to the target with
      random effect depending on its color (...or the caster's level, 
      whatever);
            a. Level 1 caster 
                  1. Target suffers 1 to 4 damage (average of 2.5)
                  2. Becomes blinded (-4 penalty to AC, -4 penalty to
                        THAC0 for 1 round)
            b. Level 2 
                  1. Target suffers 1 to 6 damage (average of 3.5)
                  2. Inflicted with pain (?) for 1 round
            c. Level 3 
                  1. Target suffers 1 to 8 damage (average of 4.5)
                  2. Burns(?) for 1 round 
            d. Level 4 
                  1. Target suffers 1 to 10 damage (average of 5.5)
                  2. Becomes blinded (-4 penalty to AC, -4 penalty to
                        THAC0) for 4 rounds
            e. Level 5
                  1. Target suffers 1 to 12 damage (average of 6.5)
                  2. Becomes stunned (cannot move/attack/cast/defend)
                        for 3 rounds
            f. Level 7 
                  1. Target suffers 2 to 16 damage (average of 9)
                  2. Becomes paralyzed (cannot move/attack/cast/defend)
                        for 13 rounds
Duration : Not applicable
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effects (including damage)
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A cheap and later powerful disabling spell, that can be cast
      quickly. However if the target makes the save, he avoids any
      harmful effect. See also COMMAND (1C).


L1-08 : COLOR SPRAY 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : Angle 
Range : 5 feet
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Vivid, fan-shape spray of clashing colors spring from the
      caster's hands. Any creature within a 5'x20'x20' wedge area 
      (medium length, medium arc ('bout 30 degrees)) in front of the
      caster suffer depending on their level. 
            a. Creatures not higher than the caster in level become
                  asleep (cannot move/attack/cast/defend, until
                  attacked) for 2 to 8 rounds (average of 5).
            b. Creatures 1 or 2 levels higher than caster become blinded 
                  (-4 penalty to AC, -4 penalty to THAC0) for 1 to 4
                  rounds (average of 2.5).
            c. Creatures 3 levels higher than the caster become stunned
                  (cannot move/attack/cast/defend) for 1 round.
Duration : See effects
Avoidance :
      a. Creatures above caster level or level 7, can save vs spells 
            to avoid effects. 	
      b. Creatures below level 7 or caster level gets no save.
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
      2. Tomb, south, second level of main burial temple, Vale of
            Shadows 
Comments : A better SLEEP (1M) spell. A convenient spell for Bards, who
      level up quickly. When attacking sleeping creatures, direct
      attacks on one creature at a time so others don't wake up. Note
      that game data for duration is in turns, it was probably just
      mistyped and is likely to be in terms of rounds as I listed here. 


L1-09 : COMMAND (COMMAND WORD DIE)
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Commands the target to "die". The target obeys and acts as if
      dead, he does not move/attack/cast/defend unless he is attacked.
Duration : 1 round
Avoidance : Save vs spell to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 1, Paladins at level 6
Comments : It doesn't do any damage and not being content with the one
      round duration, target wakes up when attacked. Still, this spell
      is one the Cleric's fastest attack spell and it can be used to
      take the wind from enemy spellcasters when they're casting spells.
      See also CHOMATIC ORB (1M), SLEEP (1M).


L1-10 : CURE LIGHT WOUNDS 
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The caster lays his hand on the target then casts this spell,
      healing 8 points of damage.
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 1, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 6
Comments : Healing spell. It's generally best to heal only characters
      with more damage than this spell heals. Front characters are
      usually the primary targets of this spell. 


L1-11 : CURSE 
Spell : Priests, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Lowers the morale of enemies within 25 feet of cast point.
            1. Affected creatures receive a -1 penalty to THAC0.
            2. Recieve a -1 penalty to all saving throws.
Duration : 6 rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 1, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 6
Comments : A defensive spell that makes it harder for enemies to hit
      your party. Useful against hard hitting opponents. It is also cast
      as a set up for other spells that have saving throws. This spell
      spell is usually used with BLESS (1CD) because of their similar 
      fixed, short durations and is generally used to make not-so-easy
      battles easier to help conserve hitpoints for harder battles.


L1-12 : DETECT EVIL 
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Divination
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Allows the caster to discover emanations of evil from any
      creature. When cast, evil creatures in the area glow red briefly.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 1, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 6
Comments : RPG spell. Used to help judge an NPC's character, especially
      when you doubt their integrity. Paladins have this ability
      naturally, it's one of their special abilities.


L1-13 : ENTANGLE 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : Area
Range :  Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Plants wrap, twist, entwine any creature within 20 feet of cast
      point. Creature on the affected must save vs spells every round or
      be entangled by plants (unable to move) for 1 round. 
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 1, Rangers at level 6
Comments : A very powerful spell that will get you far. This spell is
      used to stop enemies in their tracks so you can attack them with
      area-effect spells or ranged weapons. This is quite useful when
      facing multiple creatures good at melee combat. Entangled
      creatures can still attack, cast spells and defend. Large
      creatures such as Frost Giants, Fire Giants, Umber Hulks, Golems,
      Elementals are immune to the effects of this spell. The effects of
      two or more Entangle spells are cummulative (and they should be
      used as such). See also GREASE (1M).


L1-14 : FRIENDS 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : People who view the caster tend to be very impressed and make
      an effort to help him. While in effect, the caster receives a +5
      bonus to charisma.
Duration : [casterlevel + [1 to 4]] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable 
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
Comments : A spell generally used to lower prices when shopping. This 
      spell is best used by Bards or Mages with 18 charisma. When 
      shopping, let the character with the best reaction adjustment (ie.
      Bard affected with charisma) to shop (enter the room) alone, to
      further lower prices. This spell can also be used to possibly
      improve an NPC's reaction during dialogue with the caster.


L1-15 : GREASE 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Area with in 5 feet of cast point becomes covered with a 
      slippery layer of fatty, greasy substance. Creatures within the
      affected area must save vs spells every round or have their 
      movement slowed to a crawl for 1 round.
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Tomb, second burial site (northwest), Vale of Shadows
Comments : Slows monsters so you can pick them off one by one with 
      ranged weapons. Best used against multiple enemies good at melee
      combat. The effects of two or more Grease spells are cummulative. 
      See also ENTANGLE (1D).


L1-16 : IDENTIFY 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Divination
Target : 1 unidentified item in caster's inventory
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : Not applicable
Effect : Identifies item.
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :      
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 1
      2. Shrine, second burial site (northwest), Vale of Shadows  
Comments : Reveals unidentified item's properties. Some unidentified 
      items cannot be used unless identified, especially magic related 
      items. Some unidentified items might be cursed, and cannot be 
      removed upon wearing, unless with a REMOVE CURSE (3C) spell. You
      cast identify by right-clicking on an unidentified item in the 
      caster's inventory, then click on "identify" then "spells".       
      Characters with high lore can identify items without need for 
      this spell, just put unidentified items in their inventory and 
      right-click on them. The chance of identifying items with lore is 
      directly proportional to the lore value and inversely proportional
      to the quality of the item. The identify spell on the other hand, 
      always works. Bards have by far the highest lore, followed by
      Mages and Thieves. Lore improves with level.


L1-17 : INFRAVISION 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Divination
Target : 1 party member
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Target is able to see well in the dark, just like an elf or a
      dwarf. When target is selected when dark, monsters glow red making
      them easier to see.
Duration : 450 rounds (8 hours)
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Tomb in third burial site, Vale of Shadows
Comments : Cosmetic spell, practically useless. Good for impressing 
      your friends about how many spells your Mage knows. 


L1-18 : LARLOCH'S MINOR DRAIN 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Caster drains life out of the target and adds it to his own.
            1. Target suffers 1 to 4 damage (average of 2.5).
            2. Caster's maximum life is increased by the same amount,
                  which lasts for 10 rounds.
            3. Caster is healed by the same amount. 
Duration : See effect
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Opened tomb, east, first level of main burial temple, Vale of 
            Shadows 
Comments : A fast spell that can disrupt enemy spellcasters when they 
      are casting their spells. It doesn't do as much damage as MAGIC 
      MISSILE (1M), but it can't be countered by SHIELD (1M) either.
      The effects of two or more Minor Drain spell are cummulative;
      casting two of them will increase the caster's life by 2 to 8.


L1-19 : MAGIC MISSILE 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : 1 Creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Creates [[integer of [[casterlevel - 1]/ 2] + 1]], up to 5]
      missiles of magical energy that dart from the caster's fingertips
      and fly unerringly towards the target. Each magic missile does 
      2 to 5 magic damage. 

      Number of missiles/damage progression :
            a. Level 1 caster, 1 missile (average of 3.5 damage)
            b. Level 3, 2 missiles (7 damage)
            c. Level 5, 3 missiles (10.5 damage)
            d. Level 7, 4 missiles (14 damage)
            e. Level 9, 5 missiles (17.5 damage)

Duration : Not applicable
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
      2. Tomb, south, second level of main burial temple, Vale of
            Shadows
      3. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : This is the best if not, one of the best disrupter spells in
      the game. This spell is fast, it has no saving throw, and multiple
      projectiles make it harded to avoid disruption by magic
      resistance. This is also the Mage's basic attack spell, it does
      decent damage and since it does magic damage (as oppose to fire,
      cold, etc) it can only be resisted by magic resistance, making it
      a versatile spell able to damage most creatures. The only problem
      with this spell is that a Mage affected with SHIELD (1M) is
      completely immune to its effects. See also LARLOCH'S MINOR DRAIN
      (1M).


L1-20 : MAGICAL STONE 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Enchants a stone bullet and then is slung towards the target.
            a. The bullet does 3 to 12 crushing damage (average of 7.5).
            b. It does 6 to 24 crushing damage (average of 15) if the
                  target is an undead.
Duration : Not applicable
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 1, Paladins at level 6.
Comments : This is actually a completely magical projectile that always
      hits unless resisted. It inflicts a good amount of damage to the
      undead, and is quite useful especially against those immune to
      non-magical weapons. See also SUNSCORCH (1D), MAGIC MISSILE (1M),
      LARLOCH'S MINOR DRAIN (1M).


L1-21 : PROTECTION FROM EVIL 
Spell : Priests, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Forms a protective magical barrier around the target that moves 
      with him. 
            1. The target gains a +2 bonus to his AC,
            2. Gains +2 bonus to all his saving throws,
            3. And gains immunity against...
                  1. CHARM PERSON (1M)
                  2. CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL (2D)
                  3. DIRE CHARM (3M)
                  4. MENTAL DOMINATION (4C)
                  5. DOMINATION (5M)
Duration : [casterlevel x 3] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 1, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 6
Comments : This has a longer duration and is cummulative with the Mage's
      version of this spell. Usually cast on front characters to improve
      their defense. A Paladin's Protection from Evil special ability
      (not spell) is also cumulative with this spell and cannot be
      dispelled.


L1-22 : PROTECTION FROM EVIL 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Forms a protective magical barrier around the target that moves 
      with him. 
            1. The target gains a +2 bonus to his AC,
            2. Gains +2 bonus to all his saving throws,
            3. And gains immunity against...
                  1. CHARM PERSON (1M)
                  2. CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL (2D)
                  3. DIRE CHARM (3M)
                  4. MENTAL DOMINATION (4C)
                  5. DOMINATION (5M)
Duration : [casterlevel x 2] rounds 
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Tomb in third burial site, Vale of Shadows
Comments : This spell is cummulative with the Cleric/Druid's Protection
      from Evil. Usually cast on front characters to improve their
      defense. This can also be used to quickly improve the caster's AC
      when under attacked. See also ARMOR (1M), SHIELD (1M).


L1-23 : REMOVE FEAR 
Spell : Priests, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Abjuration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Instills courage and raises to its highest, the moral of
      friendly creatures within 30 feet of cast point. Affected
      creatures become immune to fear.
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 1, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 6
Comments : Cures and prevents fear due to spells or panic. Creatures 
      that are afraid move randomly, sometimes stand still. If party 
      members become afraid, you better cast this spell right away,
      otherwise they might run away from caster's range and into more
      opponents alone.


L1-24 : SANCTUARY 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Caster is protected by his god causing everyone to ignore his
      existence.   
            1. Target is ignored by enemies.
            2. Cannot be attacked directly.
            3. Spells that require targeting specific units won't work 
                  on the target (spellcasting won't initiate). This 
                  includes healing/ protective spells, excluding those
                  cast by the caster.                   
Duration : [caster level + 2] rounds or until caster...
            a. Attacks physically 
            b. Casts any hostile/attack spell
            c. Casts any spell that requires targeting an area
            d. Casts any beneficial spell on anyone other than himself
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
Comments : Cheap INVISIBILITY (2M)/ stealth skill. Allows your Cleric
      to scout areas, escape attack. No, your Cleric-Thief can't use
      this spell to backstab because Clerics can't use pointed weapons,
      that includes thief swords and daggers which are the only weapons
      that can backstab. The caster can cast single-target beneficial
      spells to himself and any spell that do not require targeting
      without dispelling sanctuary. Sanctuary can enable a Cleric to
      loot unlocked treasure chests/storage in the presence of enemies
      without being attacked. Sanctuary can be dispelled by enemies with
      DETECT INVISIBILITY (2M), INVISIBILITY PURGE (3CD) or DISPEL MAGIC
      (3C/3M). Some powerful creatures are unaffected by Sanctuary, they
      can notice and attack your character even with Sanctuary. 


L1-25 : SHIELD 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : An invisible barrier comes into being in front of the caster. 
            1. The caster's gains a bonus to his base AC.
                  a. His base AC is set to 4 against most weapons
                  b. Base AC is set to 2 against missiles (arrow, bolts,
                        bullets, etc.)
            2. The caster becomes immune to MAGIC MISSILE (1M) and 
                  MORDENKAINEN'S FORCE MISSILES (4M).
Duration : [casterlevel x 5] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
      2. Tomb, south, second level main burial site, Vale of Shadows
Comments : A good, long duration armor spell. This spell is used mainly
      to improve the caster's AC, just like ARMOR (1M) except this has a
      shorter duration. This spell is generally cast when your Mage is
      attacked. At higher levels though, the duration is long enough to
      make it practical to cast it before the start of hard battles.
      This spell (unlike real armor) does not prevent spellcasting or 
      the use of thief skills. See also PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M).


L1-26 : SHILLELAGH 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : The caster creates a weapon (transforms his staff). 
            1. The weapon has a base (crushing) damage of 2 to 8 
                  (average of 5) (the same amount as a bastard sword).
            2. Has a +1 bonus to hit.  
            3. Doesn't benefit from any weapon proficiency, or suffer
                  from the lack thereof.
            4. Is considered a non-magical weapon. It can't inflict
                  damage on creatures immune to non-magical weapons.
Duration : [casterlevel + 4] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 1, Rangers level 6
Comments : A good weapon during the very early levels, better than most
      weapons you'll find. See also CHILL TOUCH (1M).


L1-27 : SHOCKING GRASP 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature 
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : The caster casts this spell on himself, his hands become 
      charged with electricity. As soon as he touches the target, the
      target suffers [casterlevel + [1 to 8]] electrical damage. This
      spell has a maximum average damage of 34.5.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Tomb, northeast, second level of main burial temple, Vale of 
            Shadows
Comments : Eventually the best level 1 damage spell. This spell does
      alot of damage, has no saving throw and can be cast quickly. This
      spell does more damage than MAGIC MISSILE (1M) initially, then
      Magic Missile starts to do more damage at level 5, then this spell
      starts to do more again starting at level 14. This spell is best
      used to attack those rogue creatures that (unlike their
      companions) purposely attack spellcasters regardless of range.
      This is best learned by Bards who level up alot faster than Mages
      (and have relatively more hitpoints). See also BURNING HANDS (1M).


L1-28 : SLEEP 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1
Effect : Hostile creatures within 15 feet of cast point fall into deep
      sleep. They cannot attack/defend/cast/move unless they are 
      awakened by an attack. Level 5 and above creatures are completely
      immune to the effects of this spell, and so are level four
      creatures with 15 or more constitution.
Duration : [casterlevel x 5] rounds 
Avoidance : None
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
Comments : A very powerful spell against low-level creatures (although 
      low-level creatures won't exactly give you a run for your money).
      When using sleep, direct attacks on one creature at a time so that
      others don't wake up too. See also COLOR SPRAY (1M).


L1-29 : SUNSCORCH 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Invocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : A brilliant ray of scorching heat slants from the sky and
      strikes the target.
            a. Undead and light-sensitive creatures... 
                  1. Suffer [casterlevel x 2] + [1 to 6] fire damage, 
                        maximum average damage of 63.5.
                  2. Become blinded (-4 penalty to THAC0, -4 penalty to
                        AC) for 3 rounds. 
            b. Other creatures...
                  1. Suffer [casterlevel + [1 to 6]] fire damage,
                        maximum average damage of 33.5.
                  2. Become blinded (-4 penalty to THAC0, -4 penalty to
                        AC) for 3 rounds. 

      (This spell does more damage than is displayed here. I can't tell
      how much exactly, but it can definitely do more damage than is
      possible with these formulas.)

Duration : Not applicable
Avoidance : Save vs spells to take only half of damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 1, Rangers at level 6
Comments : The Druid's basic attack spell. This spell improves with
      level and a Druid can memorize alot of these later on. This spell
      does alot of damage against the undead and can also be used to 
      kill Trolls. Despite the description, this spell also works
      indoors. See also MAGICAL STONE (1C), BURNING HANDS (1M).





---
LEVEL 2 SPELLS


L2-01. AGANNAZAR'S SCORCHER 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : A jet of flame appears at the caster's fingertips and shoots
      toward the target of the caster's choice (points finger).
            a. Target suffers 3 to 18 fire damage (average of 21 over 2
                  rounds).
            b. Creatures between caster and target, take 2 to 16 fire
                  damage (average of 18 over 2 rounds). Unless they make
                  a save vs spells in which case they take only half of
                  that damage. 
Duration : 2 rounds 
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : This spell does alot of damage early on but doesn't improve
      with level. When using this spell against multiple opponents, try
      to target the farthest ones. Or if they converge in front of your 
      Fighters, try going to the sides and casting it on someone on the
      the other side. In short, try to line up enemies. This spell can
      also be used to finish off trolls. The only thing I managed to get
      on Agannazar, was that he was an Arch-mage and that he died at the
      final battle when the School of Wizardry at Neverwinter was 
      destroyed by the Red Wizards of Thay. See also MELF'S ACID ARROW
      (2M), FLAME BLADE (2D), BURNING HANDS (1M).


L2-02 : AID 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Necromancy/ Conjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .5
Effect : The target gains extra hitpoints and has his morale raised. 
            1. The target gains a +1 bonus to THAC0.
            2. Gains +1 bonus to all his saving throws. 
            2. His maximum life is increased by 1 to 8 (average of 4.5),
                  and is healed by the same amount.
Duration : [casterlevel + 1] rounds
Avoidance : No effect if a previous Aid spell is still active on the
      target
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 3, Paladins at level 10
Comments : A longer version of BLESS (1CD). Best used on Fighters/
      Rangers/ Paladins (especially missile-users) to further improve
      their THAC0. Despite the description, this spell is actually
      cummulative with Bless. See also STRENGTH (2M), CAT'S GRACE (2M).


L2-03 : ALICORN LANCE 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Invocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Caster creates a silver-hued, partially ethereal lance shaped 
      in the form of an alicorn (unicorn horn). The caster chooses a
      target and the alicorn lance instantaneously fires at it. 
            1. The Alicorn Lance does 3 to 18 piercing damage (average
                  of 10.5). 
            2. It leaves a silvery radiance around the the target that
                  makes him easier to see (-2 AC penalty for 3 rounds).
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to take only half of damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 3, Rangers at level 10
Comments : A spell that lowers AC. The effects of two or more Alicorn
      Lance spells are cummulative. This spell can cause up to a -8 AC
      penalty on the target (due to duration). The damage this spell
      inflicts is weak but it can greatly make the target easier to
      hit by other party members, and that part of the spell has no
      saving throw. See also BLINDNESS (2M), SUNSCORCH (1D).


L2-04 : BARKSKIN 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The target's skin is becomes as tough as bark giving extra 
      protection. 
            1. The target gets a bonus to his Base AC depending on the
                 caster's level.
                  a. Level 3 caster, the target's base AC is set to 6
                  b. Level  4, base AC is set to 5
                  c. Level  8, base AC is set to 4
                  d. Level 12, base AC is set to 3
                  e. Level 16, base AC is set to 2
                  f. Level 20, base AC is set to 1
                  g. Level 24, base AC is set to 0
                  h. Level 28, base AC is set to -1
            2. The target gains a +1 bonus to all his saving throws,
                  except against magic.
Duration : [casterlevel + 4] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 3, Rangers level 10
Comments : A good protection spell that can be cast on anybody. This
      spell is mainly used on Mages, Bards, Thieves and Druids. It is
      (eventually - if you can reach level 24) the best armor spell.
      This spell (unlike real armor) does not prevent spellcasting or
      the use of thief skills. See also PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M).


L2-05 : BEAST CLAW 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : Caster 
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Transforms the caster's arms into claws like that of a mighty
      beast. The caster can then use it as a melee weapon.
            1. The caster's strength is set to 18/72 (+2 to hit, +3 
                  damage).
            2. The claws have a base damage of 2 to 8 (average of 5) 
                  (slashing damage), have a +2 to hit bonus and can
                  attack twice per round.
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 3, Rangers at level 10
Comments : A good fighting spell for Druids. Use with BARKSKIN (2D) and/
      or PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M) if necessary. Turns your Druid
      into a warrior if your party needs an extra sword. See also FLAME
      BLADE (2D), SHILLELAGH (1D), STRENGTH (1M).


L2-06 : BLINDNESS 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : The target is blinded.  
            1. He receives -4 penalty to his THAC0.
            2. Receives -4 penalty to his AC.
Duration : 450 rounds (8 hours)
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effects
Obtain from : 
      1. Small box in hidden room, west, first level of main burial
            temple, Vale of Shadows 
Comments : This spell is best used against very tough fighter-type
      creatures. It makes them do less damage and easier to hit, most
      probably until they die. The effects of two or more Blindness
      spells are cumulative. How ? um... gee, look at the time. See also
      ALICORN LANCE (2D), CHILL TOUCH (1M).


L2-07 : BLUR 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Caster's body appears blurred, shifting and wavering making him
      harder to hit. 
            1. The caster gains +3 bonus to his AC.
            2. Gains +1 bonus to all his saving throws. 
Duration : [casterlevel + 3] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Orcs in Mill House, Kuldahar Pass
      2. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 1
      3. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A spell that protects the caster when attacked. MIRROR IMAGE
      (2M) is usually alot better than this spell, though their effects
      are cummulative. This spell works best with SHIELD (1M) and
      PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M). See also INVISIBILITY (2M).


L2-08 : CAUSE MODERATE WOUNDS (Reverse of CURE MODERATE WOUNDS)
Spell : Non-good Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The caster touches the target then casts this spell, causing 11
      magic damage.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to suffer only half damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 3
Comments : A very weak attack spell. This spell is hard to use because
      it has a long casting time, and because it doesn't do alot of
      damage. This spell also doesn't work on non-living creatures,
      including the undead. DRAW UPON HOLY MIGHT (2C) and SPIRITUAL
      HAMMER (2C) are good alternatives to this spell if you want to do
      close-range damage. See also CAUSE LIGHT WOUNDS (1nongoodC).


L2-09 : CAT'S GRACE 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Transforms the target to become more dexterous. The amount of
      dexterity gain partly depends on the target's class.
            a. Thieves gain 1 to 8 dexterity (average of 4.5).
            b. Fighters and Mages, gain 1 to 6 dexterity (average of 
                  3.5).
            c. Clerics gain 1 to 4 dexterity (average of 2.5).
Duration : [casterlevel x 56.25] rounds (or 1 hour per level)
Avoidance : Dexterity cannot exceed 20
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 1
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : An enhancement spell with a very long duration. Dexterity
      affects ranged weapon THAC0 bonus, thief skills bonus, AC bonus.
      This spell is mainly used on Thieves to increase thief skills, or
      Fighters that don't have 18 dexterity (like Dwarves, probably
      Paladins) to increase AC. Note that there is no difference in the
      AC bonus due to 18, 19 or 20 dexterity. One thing to remember
      about using this spell is to not forget to cast it, develop the
      habit of casting it right after resting. See also STRENGTH (2M),
      DRAW UPON HOLY MIGHT (2C).


L2-10 : CHANT 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : This spell brings special favor to all allies and harm to all
      enemies within 30 feet of cast point.
            1. This spell requires a moderate amount of concentration;
                  the caster cannot cast spells and have his movement
                  slowed for the spell's duration.
            2. Allies gain...
                  1. +1 bonus to THAC0
                  2. +1 damage to physical attacks
                  3. +1 bonus to all saving throws
            3. Enemies receive...
                  1. -1 penalty to THAC0
                  2. -1 damage to physical attacks
                  3. -1 penalty to all saving throws
Duration : 10 rounds 
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 3, Paladins at level 10
Comments : A powerful early level combat spell with a price. This spell
      is best used with BLESS (1CD) and CURSE (1CD) in early fights. You
      can send the caster to fight after casting this spell since he
      can no longer cast spells. Later on though, when more powerful
      spells are available, the no-cast penalty becomes a higher price
      to pay. And as such, this spell is either forgotten, or just used
      to support easy battles to help conserve hitpoints for harder
      battles.


L2-11 : CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 
      a. 1 mammal 
      b. 1 bipedal human, demihuman or humanoid. Target must be man-size
            or smaller. Possible target includes Dwarves, Elves, Gnolls,
            Gnomes, Goblins, Half-elves, Halflings, Half-orcs,
            Hobgoblins, Humans, Lizard Men, Orcs, Troglodytes and
            others.
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Target regards the caster as a trusted friend and obeys his
      instructions without question. 
Duration : 10 rounds or until target is attacked by the player's
      forces 
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 3, Rangers at level 10
Comments : A powerful spell against people or mammals. It's usually best
      to send charmed creatures to go fight enemies to their deaths,
      keep them away from vulnerable party members. Charmed creatures
      can only attack using their default weapons, you cannot order them
      to cast spells or use thieving spells, etc. Charmed creatures are 
      considered friendlies and spells like BLESS (1CD) will affect
      them. This spell is considered as hostile, friendly creatures you
      charmed will turn against you afterwards. Creatures affected by
      PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M) are immune to the effects of this
      spell. See also CHARM PERSON (1M).


L2-12 : CURE MODERATE WOUNDS 
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The caster lays his hand on the target then casts this spell,
      healing 11 points of damage.
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 3, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 10
Comments : Healing spell. It's generally best to heal only characters
      with more damage than this spell heals. Front characters are
      usually the primary targets of this spell. See also GOODBERRY
      (2D), CURE LIGHT WOUNDS (1CD).


L2-13 : DECASTAVE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Creates a magical staff of force in the caster's hands. 
            1. The staff has a base damage (crushing) of 1 to 6 (average
                  of 3.5).
            2. It also does 1 to 2 magical damage (average of 1.5) per
                   hit and heals the caster by the same amount.  
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2 and 4
Comments : A spell Fighter-Mages can use to hit creatures immune to
      non-magical weapons. This spell will fail if the caster is holding
      a shield. See also CHILL TOUCH (1M).


L2-14 : DETECT EVIL 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Divination
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Allows the caster to discover emanations of evil from any
      creature. When cast, evil creatures in the area glow red briefly.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Snake Statue, first level, Dragon's Eye
Comments : RPG spell. Used to help judge an NPC's character, especially
      when you doubt their integrity. The information on this spell say
      that it's a level 1 spell, but it is actually a level 2 spell.
      Clerics and Druids also have this spell, but at a lower spell
      level (level 1).


L2-15 : DETECT INVISIBILITY 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Divination
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Dispels any invisibility, and reveals hidden creatures within
      sight range of the caster. This spell doesn't affect friendly or
      neutral creatures.    
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
Comments : Invisible creatures cannot be attacked directly, and might be
      able to come close to vulnerable party members. Stealthed thieves
      can backstab inflict lots of damage in one hit. This can be cast
      by a Cleric-Mage without dispelling an existing SANCTUARY (1C) on
      the him. DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M) can also dispel invisibilities but
      not Stealth/ Hide in Shadows.


L2-16 : DRAW UPON HOLY MIGHT 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Invocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : The caster's god grants him physical power. The amount of power 
      given depends on the caster's level.
            a. Level 3 caster, gains +1 bonus to strength, +1 bonus to
                  dexterity and +1 bonus to constitution
            b. Level  6, gains  +2 
            c. Level  9, gains  +3 
            d. Level 12, gains  +4 
            e. Level 15, gains  +5 
            f. Level 18, gains  +6 
            g. Level 21, gains  +7
            h. Level 24, gains  +8
            i. Level 27, gains  +9
            j. Level 30, gains +10

      Each strength bonus above 18 and below 19 are equivalent to a jump
      in the strength table.
            a. 18 + 1 = 18/01
            b. 18 + 2 = 18/51  
            c. 18 + 3 = 18/76
            d. 18 + 4 = 18/91
            e. 18 + 5 = 18/00
            f. 18 + 6 = 19 

Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Maximum 25 ability score limit
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 3, Paladins at level 10
Comments : A very powerful combat spell for Paladins and
      Fighter-Clerics, who can naturally have exceptional strength. Note
      that the Paladin's spellcasting level in Icewind Dale is his class
      level. A Gnome Cleric-Thief can also use this spell to greatly
      increase his thief skills (via dexterity). This spell works best
      with STRENGTH (2M), CAT'S GRACE (2M) cast beforehand (and/or other
      strength/dexterity/constitution-improving items/potions). See also
      BEAST CLAW (2D).


L2-17 : FIND TRAPS 
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Traps become apparent to the caster as if he is a thief; traps
      within 10 feet of, and in sight of the caster glows red.
Duration : 30 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 3, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 10
Comments : A quicker way of finding traps. This spell doesn't give the
      caster the ability to disarm traps. This is mainly used in
      difficult battles where there are dangerous traps. You may not be
      able to disarm them, but you know where they are and you can avoid
      them. Unlike the thief's Find Traps skill, this spell allows the
      caster to surely and instantly find traps and still be able to
      attack/ cast spells more or less (caster interrupts every now and
      then). 


L2-18 : FLAME BLADE 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Evocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : A ray of red-hot fire spring forth from the caster's hand. This
      blade-like ray can be wielded like a melee weapon. 
            1. The weapon is considered a scimitar (Large Sword) for the
                  purpose of determining the bonus (or penalty) due to
                  weapons proficiency. 
            2. The damage the weapon does depends on the target.
                  a. Normal creatures, 5 to 8 fire damage (average of
                        6.5) 
                  b. Undead and fire-vulnerable creatures, 7 to 10 fire
                        damage (average of 8.5)
                  c. Fire resistant creatures, 3 to 6 fire damage
                        (average of 4.5)
                  d. Fire-dwelling or fire-using creatures, none
            3. It is considered a non-magical weapon for determining
                  what creatures it can hit. (It can't hit creatures 
                  immune to non-magical weapons even if it does fire 
                  damage) 
Duration : [casterlevel + 4] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 3, Rangers at level 10
Comments : A cheap Troll-killing spell. You can also consider using this
      spell when faced with the undead, or creatures vulnerable to fire.
      See also SHILLELAGH (1D).


L2-19 : GHOUL TOUCH 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature 
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : The caster casts this spell on himself causing a green glow to
      encompass his hands, and touches the target: paralyzing him for 6
      rounds unless the target makes a saving throw vs spells.
Duration : Instant	
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Tomb, northeast, second level of main burial temple, Vale of 
            Shadows
Comments : A fast hold spell that works on anybody. This spell is best
      learned by Fighter-Mages or Cleric-Mages, who have more hitpoints
      and can wear Helmets and Shields. This is best used against strong
      fighter-types (attack/distract with Fighter, then sneak the 
      spell). This spell can paralyze large creatures (unlike WEB (2M)),
      and works on non-people creatures (unlike HOLD PERSON (3M/2C)). 
      CHROMATIC ORB (1M) though, will soon eventually surpass this spell
      starting at level 7. Undead creatures cannot be held (paralyzed).


L2-20 : GOODBERRY 
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Evocation
Target : Caster's inventory
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Creates 1 clump of magical berries in the caster's inventory.
      They can be consumed to heal 5 points of damage.
Duration : [1350 x casterlevel] rounds (or 1 day per level)
Avoidance : Caster's inventory must have free space
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 3, Rangers level 10
Comments : A weird healing spell. You could stock up on these since 
      they last for a VERY long time, which you can hand over to party
      members. The clumps of goodberries are stackable up to 10 per 
      inventory space. Goodberries heal only 5 damage, so it's not very
      useful in hard battles, however they can be used in between 
      battles to keep your fighter's HP up without using expensive 
      potions or precious spells. The best place to stack up on 
      goodberries is at inns, where you can't be interrupted. With 2 
      clumps healing almost the same amount as a healing potion, it's
      really a bargain. Although casting Goodberrys and stacking them
      repeatedly can be chore, so is trying to rest in dungeons simply
      because you run out of healing spells (even when you still have
      lots of other spells). Sometimes I experience a bug when stacking
      goodberries into the caster's quickslot, so just give them to 
      other characters as soon as you stack them. See also CURE MODERATE
      WOUNDS (2CD), CURE LIGHT WOUNDS (1CD).


L2-21 : HOLD PERSON 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : 1 to 4 (average of 2.5) hostile bipedal human, demihuman and/
      or humanoid. Targets must be man-size or smaller. Possible targets
      include Dwarves, Elves, Gnolls, Gnomes, Goblins, Half-Elves,
      Halflings, Half-Orcs, Hobgoblins, Humans, Lizard men, Orcs,
      Troglodytes and others. 
Duration : [casterlevel x 2] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect 
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 3, Paladins at level 10
Comments : Powerful disabling spell against people, making them 
      helpless in battle, practically dead. Held people will always get
      hit so don't hesitate to target them with ranged weapons, even 
      with weak characters. Undead creatures cannot be held. See also
      CHARM PERSON (1M), CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL (2D), WEB (2M), GHOUL
      TOUCH (2M), CHROMATIC ORB (1M). 


L2-22 : HORROR 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Hostile creatures within 15 feet of cast point flee in terror 
      (cannot attack/cast spells, runs around/stands still randomly).
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Crate, southwest in Easthaven cave 
Comments : Fast area-effect spell that won't harm your party. An easy
      spell to use that can get you out of trouble when vulnerable party
      members are cornered, or if your party is taking too much damage
      and need some breathing space. The effects of this spell is
      nullified by RESIST FEAR (2M) or REMOVE FEAR (1CD). BLESS (1CD)
      increases the chance to save against this spell. The undead are
      immune to fear, although a Cleric or Paladin's TURN UNDEAD ability
      produces a similar effect. See also SLEEP (1M).


L2-23 : INVISIBILITY 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Target becomes invisible.
            1. Target is ignored by enemies.
            2. Target cannot be attacked physically.
            3. Spells that require targeting specific units won't work 
                  on the target (spellcasting won't initiate), this 
                  includes healing/ protective spells.
Duration : 225 rounds (4 hours) or until target...
            a. Attacks
            b. Casts any spell
            c. Opens/ looks at any chest or storage
            d. Uses Pickpocket or Remove Trap skill
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. On the wall, fourth burial site, Vale of Shadows (use ALT)
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : A very good protection spell, though you can't attack. This
      spell can be used to protect a weak or dying member from attack,
      the character can then just stay put and not attack or run away 
      from the battle to safety. An invisible character can also be used
      to scout areas for traps, check distance to opponents (to set up
      spells). It can be used to force armored fighter-thieves into
      stealth, even in battle to enable them to backstab. Unlike
      SANCTUARY (1C), invisibility can be cast on any creature and lasts
      for a very long time, although there are more conditions for
      expiration. Invisibility can be dispelled by enemies with DETECT
      INVISIBILITY (2M), INVISIBILITY PURGE (3CD) or DISPEL MAGIC
      (3C/3M). Some powerful creatures can see/sense even invisible
      creatures, they can notice and attack your invisible character as
      if he were visible. Note that there is only 1 Invisibility scroll
      in Icewind Dale proper, as such, you should probably let your Mage
      learn it (not your Bard if you have one).


L2-24 : KNOCK 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 locked door/ chest/ storage
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Opens target.
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Tomb in hidden room, west, first level of main burial temple,
            Vale of Shadows
Comments : No thief ? No problem. Use when your thief can't pick a lock,
      or if you're an extreme player who did'nt bring one along. See
      also CAT'S GRACE (2M), LUCK (2M), DRAW UPON HOLY MIGHT (2C).


L2-25 : KNOW ALIGNMENT 
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Divination
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Enables the caster to read auras. The target's alignment
      becomes known.
            a. Good creatures glow green.
            b. Neutral-aligned creatures glow blue.
            c. Evil creatures glow red.
Duration : Short moment
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 3, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 10
Comments :  RPG spell. Used to help judge an NPC's character, especially
      when you doubt their integrity. See also DETECT EVIL (2M/1CD).


L2-26 : KNOW ALIGNMENT (Mages)
None found.


L2-27 : LUCK 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : The target becomes very lucky.
            1. Gains +1 to all his saving throws
            2. Gains +1 to his THAC0
            3. Gains +1 to his thieving rolls
Duration : 3 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1.  Skeleton in one of burial sites (first/north), Vale of Shadows
Comments : Pickpocket support spell. Because of the spell's short
      duration, this spell is used as a last resort when your thief
      can't pickpocket someone even though he is already affected with
      a CAT'S GRACE (2M) spell. See also KNOCK (2M), FIND TRAPS (2M).


L2-28 : MELF'S ACID ARROW 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Creates a magical arrow that speeds unerringly to its target.
      Upon impact the target suffers 2 to 8 acid damage every round, for
      [[integer of [casterlevel / 3]] + 1] rounds. 

      Duration/damage progression :
            a. Level 3 caster, 2 rounds (combined average damage of 10)
            b. Level 6, 3 rounds (15 damage)
            c. Level 9, 4 rounds (20 damage) 
            d. Level 12, 5 rounds (25 damage)
            f. Level 15, 6 rounds (30 damage)
            g. Level 18, 7 rounds (35 damage)
            h. Level 21, 8 rounds (40 damage)
            i. Level 24, 9 rounds (45 damage)
            j. Level 27, 10 rounds (50 damage)
            k. Level 30, 11 rounds (55 damage)

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A very powerful anti-spellcaster spell. This spell does alot
      of damage and has no saving throw. However, the damage takes time
      to occur. This spell is best learned by Bards, who level up alot
      quicker than Mages. The persistent damage cause by this spell 
      might (and most probably will) disrupt spellcasting, especially
      spells that have long casting times. The effects of two or more
      Acid Arrow spells are cumulative, making it practical to rain Acid
      Arrows on a target continually. This spell can also be used simply
      to kill Trolls. All I found out about Melf is that he(?) is a
      powerful elven wizard in Greyhawk. He also created the spell :
      Melf's Minute Meteors (3M). See also AGANNAZAR'S SCORCHER (2M),
      MAGIC MISSILE (1M), SUNSCORCH (1D).


L2-29 : MIRROR IMAGE 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time :  .1 round
Effect : A slight distortion temporily appears to hide the caster and
      then the spell creates 2 to 8 (probably depends on caster's level)
      alternate images of the caster. These images do exactly what the
      caster does, confusing attackers. Successful attacks against the
      caster have a [[100 x number of images]/ [number of images + 1]]
      percent chance of hitting one of the images instead (the more
      images, the harder to hit). Whenever an image takes a hit, it
      disappears.
Duration : [casterlevel x 3] rounds, or until all images are hit
Avoidance : No effect if a previous Mirror Image is still in effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar; Chapters 1, 2 and 4
      2. Bookshelf, torture room, 5rth level, Dragon's Eye
      3. Edion Caradoc, Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : A very good, universal protection spell that can be cast
      quickly. This spell can absorb almost any type of attack including
      damage from area-effect spells. See also BLUR (2M), INVISIBILITY
      (2M), BARKSKIN (2D), SHIELD (1M), ARMOR (1M), PROTECTION FROM EVIL
      (1CD/1M).


L2-30 : PROTECTION FROM PETRIFICATION 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Target gains immunity from petrification. 
Duration : [casterlevel x 3] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Crate southeast of cave, Easthaven 
Comments : Very few uses, on the other hand petrification is usually
      worse than death. This spell won't cure a petrified character.
      This is listed as a level 1 spell in the manual. An alternative to
      this spell is to drink a POTION OF MIRRORED EYES (which lasts for 
      only 10 rounds). 


L2-31 : RESIST FEAR 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Intills courage and raises the moral of all friendly creatures
      within 30 feet of cast point to its highest. Affected creatures 
      become immune to fear.
Duration : 56.25 rounds (or 1 hour)
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Tomb in hidden room, west, first level of main burial temple,
            Vale of Shadows
Comments : Cures and prevents fear due to spells or panic. Creatures 
      that are afraid move randomly, sometimes stand still. If party 
      members become afraid, you better cast this spell right away,
      otherwise they might run away from caster's range and into more
      opponents alone. This spell is particularly useful against
      Harpies. See also REMOVE FEAR (1CD).


L2-32 : RESIST FIRE/RESIST COLD 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The target's body is toughened to withstand heat and cold. 
            1. He gains 50 cold resistance,
            2. And 50 fire resistance
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 3, Paladins at level 10
Comments : A spell that gives absolute protection from fire or cold
      damage. The effects of 2 or more of this spell is cumulative
      raising both resistance up to 127. This is the only targetable
      spell that increases cold resistance. This spell is usually cast
      on your front character, and is useful when fighting cold-causing
      enemies like Cold Wights, Blast Skeletons, Winter Wolves, Frost
      Salamanders, etc; or fire-causing enemies like Burning Skeletons,
      Salamanders, Fire Elementals, etc. And since this spell also
      increases the opposite resistance, you can afford to cast the
      correponding cold or fire area-effect spells (ie. AGANNAZAR'S
      SCORCHER (2M)/ SNILLOC'S SNOWBALL SWARM (2M)) without damaging
      your front character. This spell is particularly useful at higher
      levels where the Cleric has alot more level 2 spell slots and
      where the spell's duration is longer. 


L2-33 : SILENCE 15' RADIUS (Silence, 15 Feet Radius)
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Alteration
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : All creatures within 15 feet of cast point must save vs spells
      or be silenced (cannot cast spells, sing Bard songs or initiate
      dialogue).
Duration : [casterlevel x 2] rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 3, Paladins at level 10
Comments : A powerful area-effect spell against spellcasters. This spell
      affects everyone, not just enemies so be careful. A general
      technique that works well with this spell is to separate your
      party into two groups in a fight; all spellcasters together way
      back, while the rest of the party group up in front. This way you
      can cast Silence on the main group without having to worry about
      disabling your spellcasters. You can also use this spell to
      casting it beyond visual range but close enough so that the 
      enemies are within the area of effect. See also MELF'S ACID ARROW
      (2M). 


L2-34 : SLOW POISON 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 (poisoned) creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Effects of venomed is slowed; the speed of poison damage on the
      target is reduced.
Duration : Until healed (?)
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics level 3, Paladins at level 10
Comments : A quick poison remedy when engaging something that causes 
      poison in battle. A poisoned character takes damage continually
      for a certain duration. If the poison is potent, the character 
      might not have sufficient life to bear the damage, and casting
      healing spells repeatedly is quite expensive. Also poison can (and
      will probably will) disrupt any spellcasting. The alternative to 
      using this spell is to bring along ANTIDOTEs, or ELIXIRs OF 
      HEALTH. 


L2-35 : SNILLOC'S SNOWBALL SWARM
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Cause a flurry of snowballs to erupt from cast point hitting
      every creature within 25 feet.
            a. Fire-using or fire-dwelling creatures take [[1 to 6] x 
                  casterlevel] damage up to a maximum of 8 to 48 
                  (average of 28).
            b. Other creatures take [[1 to 3] x caster level] damage up
                  to a maximum of 8 to 24 (average of 16). 
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to take only half damage
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2 and 4
Comments : A ranged spell that does damage on a very large area. A spell
      best used when facing multiple opponents. Sometimes it's
      acceptable to hit 1 or 2 party members if you get to hit a large
      number of opponents along with them. This spell can also be used
      to disrupt enemy spellcasters because of its quick casting time.
      Snilloc is the author of the tome The Collected Wisdom of Snilloc.
      He is believed to have travelled to the fabled lands of Zakhara,
      his fate remains unknown. He also created the spell Snilloc's 
      Snowball (1M). See also RESIST FIRE/RESIST COLD (2C). 


L2-36 : SPIRITUAL HAMMER 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Invocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Brings forth, a magical war hammer into existense which the
      caster may use as his weapon. Like any hammer, it has a base
      damage of 2 to 5 (average of 3.5). The weapon's bonus depends on
      the caster's level.  
            a. Level 3 caster, +1 (+1 bonus to THAC0 and damage, able to
                  hit creatures vulnerable to +1 magical weapons)
            b. Level 7, +2
            c. Level 13, +3 (maximum)
Duration : [casterlevel + 3] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 3, Paladins at level 10
Comments : Insta-magic weapon spell. It can be used to hit creatures
      immune to non-magical/ low-magical weapons. It can also be used 
      simply for combat purposes if you don't have a better weapon. See
      also FLAME BLADE (2D), DECASTAVE (2M), SHILLELAGH (1D).


L2-37 : STINKING CLOUD 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : The area within 10 feet of cast point is filled with a
      billowing mass of nauseous vapors. Any breathing creature within
      the affected area must save vs death every round; or fall
      unconscious for 1 round, unable to move/attack/cast/defend. 
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Skeleton, in the first burial site (north), Vale of Shadows
      2. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 4
      3. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A weaker, smaller, alternate version of WEB (2M). This spell
      is used to stop multiple enemies in their tracks so you can attack
      them with area-effect spells and ranged weapons. Unlike Web, this
      spell affects Frost Giants, Fire Giants and Umber Hulks. 
      Non-breathing creatures such as the undead, Golems, Sentries are
      unaffected by this spell. Characters affected with EXALTATION (3C)
      are also immune to the effects of this spell, allowing them to 
      safely move into the cloud and hack helpless enemies (and lure
      more of them into the cloud). Unconcious creatures will always get
      hit so don't hesitate to attack them with ranged weapons, even
      with weak members. The effects of two or more Stinking Cloud
      spells are cummulative (and they should be used as such). See also
      HOLD PERSON (3M/2C), ENTANGLE (1D), GREASE (1M).


L2-38 : STRENGTH 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Transforms the target to become alot stronger.
            a. Fighters gain 1 to 8 strength (average of 4.5). Points
                  over 18 are converted to 10% exceptional strength 
                  each, up to 18/00.
            b. Clerics and Thieves gain 1 to 6 strength (average of 
                  3.5), up to a maximum of 18.
            c. Mages gain 1 to 4 strength (average of 2.5) up to a
                  maximum of 18.
Duration : [casterlevel x 56.25] rounds (or 1 hour per level)
Avoidance : No effect if a previous Strength spell is still active on
      the target
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 1
      2. Tomb, in second burial site (northwest), Vale of Shadows 
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : I like this spell because it's a cast and forget spell. Most
      of your characters can benefit from this spell since alot of the
      combat in IWD is melee. Even non-melee characters can benefit from
      it because it allows them to carry more things, a huge convenience
      for people who don't go to towns often, but want to sell
      everything they get their greedy hands on. See also CAT'S GRACE
      (2M), AID (2C), DRAW UPON HOLY MIGHT (2C), BEAST CLAW (2D). 


L2-39 : VOCALIZE
None found.


L2-40 : WEB 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Creates a multi-layered mass of strong, sticky strands 
      everywhere within 15 feet of cast point. These are just like 
      spider webs but bigger and stronger. Any creature in the affected
      area must save vs spells every round or get stucked in it for 1
      round, unable to move/attack/cast/defend. 
Duration : 15 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 1 and 2
      3. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : This is a powerful spell that can immobilize large numbers 
      enemies. Not just stop their movement, but basically paralyzes
      them. This is the only spell that can paralyze (so to speak) an 
      undead. Characters affected by FREE ACTION (4C) are immune to the
      effects of this spell, allowing them to safely move in the web and
      hack helpless enemies (and lure more of them into the web). Large
      creatures such as Frost Giants, Fire Giants, Umber Hulks, Golems,
      Elementals are unaffected by this spell. Webbed creatures will
      always get hit so don't hesitate to target them with ranged
      weapons, even with weak characters. The effects of two or more Web
      spells are cummulative (and they should be used as such). See also
      STINKING CLOUD (2M), HOLD PERSON (3M/2C), ENTANGLE (1D), GREASE
      (1M). 





---
LEVEL 3 SPELLS


L3-01 : ANIMATE DEAD
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Necromancy
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Bodies of the dead become animated and follow simple verbal
      commands from the caster (doesn't actually need corpse). The spell
      summons... 
            i.   [1 to casterlevel] level Skeleton or Zombie
            ii.  [1 to [casterlevel - levels of first Skeleton or
                 Zombie] level Skeleton or Zombie
            iii. [1 to [casterlevel - sum of the levels of the previous
                 Skeletons and/or Zombies] level Skeleton or Zombie
            ... and so on until no levels are left.   
      (In short, it summons 1 to 6 Skeletons and/or Zombies, the sum of
      their levels is equal or less than the caster's level.) 
Duration : 450 rounds (or 8 hours)
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : Skeletons and Zombies are not particularly tough, but they
      last very long and are manageable. They are generally used as
      escorts, cast right after resting and replaced as they die. Since
      they last long, they may benefit from any beneficial area spell
      cast on your party. These guys are also completely immune to cold
      damage, fear, charm, hold spells. Skeletons are generally armed
      with non-magical ranged or melee weapons, although some may have
      Arrows of Fire, Arrows +1 or High Quality Mace. See also MONSTER
      SUMMONING I (3M).


L3-02 : CALL LIGHTNING
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : 1 (hostile) creature
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round 
Effect : The caster calls down bolts of lightning; lightning strikes the
      the target, then every 10 rounds, lightning strikes a random enemy
      within sight of the caster. Each lightning bolt inflicts 
      [[2 to 16] + [casterlevel x [1 to 8]]] electrical damage. This
      spell can only work outdoors (because it's supposed to require a
      storm). 

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 5 caster, 31.5 average damage per bolt
            Level 10, 54 damage
            Level 15, 76.5 damage
            Level 20, 99 damage
            Level 25, 121.5 damage 
            Level 30, 144 damage

Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 5, Rangers at level 12
Comments : THE most powerful damage spell in the game. But, its
      usefulness is very limited because most of the areas in Icewind
      Dale are indoors. The effects of two or more Call Lightning spells
      are cummulative (along with STATIC CHARGE (4D)). Unlike Static
      Charge, this spell requires an initial target. The target must be
      a hostile creature, otherwise the following bolts won't appear.
      The following bolts also won't appear if the caster becomes 
      invisible after casting this spell.  


L3-03 : CAUSE DISEASE (Reverse of CURE DISEASE)
Spell : Non-good Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch 
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : The caster touches the target then casts this spell, afflicting
      him with a disease that saps 5 to 20 (average of 12.5) points of
      strength.
Duration : 450 rounds (or 8 hours)
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5
Comments : Use againts strong melee creatures. Distract the target with
      a Fighter then cast this spell. The effects of 2 or more Cause
      Disease spells are cumulative. This spell can work on undead
      creatures. See also SLOW (3M), BLINDNESS (2M), CHILL TOUCH (1M).
 

L3-04 : CIRCLE OF BONES
Spell : Non-good Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Conjures forth a barrier of floating bones that spin rapidly
      around the caster. 
            1. Any creature within 3 feet of the caster (excluding the
                  caster) suffers...
                  1. 1 to 6 crushing damage every round
                  2. 1 to 6 slashing damage every round
                  (Average combined damage of 21 over 3 rounds, per
                  victim.)
            2. The caster becomes immobile for the spell's duration.
Duration : 3 rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5
Comments : Silent-kill spell. This spell can be cast without dispelling
      an existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on the caster. This spell can be
      used to kill specific enemies (such as spellcasters) while being
      invisible. The effects of 2 or more Circle of Bones spell are
      cummulative. Because this spell doesn't do that much damage, it
      should be memorized en masse. The same combination (+Sanctuary)
      can also be used by standing in front of the party while enemies
      are coming. 


L3-05 : CLOUDBURST
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Invocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Brings magical rain that saturates every area within 30 feet of
      cast point. Creatures in the affected area are affected.
            1. FLAME BLADEs (2D), SHROUD OF FLAMEs (5M), Salamander
                  Auras are extinguished.  
            2. Each round, there is 50 percent chance creatures are
                  struck with lightning bolts, doing 2 to 12 electrical
                  damage (average of 7), save vs spells to take only
                  half damage. (Note : equivalent of 100 percent chance
                  to get hit once over 2 rounds.) 
            3. Each round, cold and fire dwelling/using creatures take 
                  additional 2 to 12 magic damage (average of 14 ?ver 2
                  rounds).
Duration : 2 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 5, Rangers at level 12
Comments : This spell is used mainly to extinguish devastating auras,
      it's the only way do it (other than slicing the creatures that
      have them in two). It has a very wide area of effect, so be extra
      careful not to hit friendly/neutral creatures if applicable. The
      effects of two or more Cloudburst are cummulative.  
 

L3-06 : CURE DISEASE
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature 
Range : Touch
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : The caster lays his hand on the target then casts this spell,
      curing the target of (all forms of) disease and healing him of 5
      points of damage.
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : Disease is a generic status of many possible effects. Some
      monsters cause a weak form of disease that is similar to poison,
      the CAUSE DISEASE (3nongoodC) spell causes the target to lose
      strength. Some monsters however, like Mummies, cause a lethal form
      of disease (fail to save vs death, at an attack) where the victim
      continually loses hitpoints frequently over a very long period of
      time, eventually causing death (rate of damage too fast for
      resting - really fast). This spell will remove any form of
      disease, however it is usually better to just always bring along
      Cure Disease Scrolls, MUMMY'S TEA or PHILTER OF PURIFICATION
      potions, as you're not sure when you'll need it. The symbol for
      disease status is a red cross with holes on the one side, treat
      characters with disease immediately or reload (keeps you from
      having a character with disease and not noticing that you don't
      have any potions or spells for it). Paladins are immune to
      disease, and have the ability to cure disease, once a day. See
      also MOLD TOUCH (3D).


L3-07 : DIRE CHARM
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 bipedal human, demihuman or humanoid. Target must be man-size
      or smaller. Possible target includes Dwarves, Elves, Gnolls,
      Gnomes, Goblins, Half-Elves, Halflings, Half-Orcs, Hobgoblins,
      Humans, Lizard Men, Orcs, Troglodytes and others.
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Target regards the caster as his master and is obsessed with 
      protecting him. Target is under your control.
Duration : 20 rounds or until target is attacked by the players forces
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2 and 4
Comments : A powerful spell against people. It's usually best to send
      charmed creatures to go fight enemies to their deaths, keep them
      away from vulnerable party members. Charmed creatures can only
      attack using their default weapons, you cannot order them to cast
      spells or use thieving spells, etc. Charmed creatures are 
      considered friendlies and spells like BLESS (1CD) will affect
      them. Dire charm is considered a hostile spell, friendly creatures
      you charmed will turn hostile afterwards. Creatures affected by 
      PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M) are immune to this spell. Elves have
      a 90% resistance against this spell, Half-elves: 30%. This spell
      lasts longer than CHARM PERSON (1M) or CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL 
      (2D).


L3-09 : DISPEL MAGIC
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Dispels all magical effects of spells, potions and (spells cast
      from) magical items on every creature within 15 feet of cast
      point. Fire Seeds (FIRE SEEDS (6D)) and Goodberries (GOODBERRY
      (2D)) in the inventories of characters in the affected area, are
      also dispelled. Magical effects caused by the wearing of magical
      items are unaffected. This spell cannot dispel the effects of
      healing spells or damage caused by attack spells. It cannot dispel
      fatigue caused by HASTE (3M) or RIGHTEOUS WRATH OF THE FAITHFUL
      (5C), although it can dispel that caused by BLOOD RAGE (4nonlawC).

      As a general rule, any magical effect on a creature that is
      permanent over time cannot be dispelled. While any effect that has
      a duration is dispellable.

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : One of the most powerful spell in Icewind Dale because it
      affects almost all spells and has no saving throw. It can be used
      to dispel beneficial spells on enemies and/or harmful spells on
      your party. If your party has alot of Warriors, you'll love this
      spell. If you don't, you'll hate it. A creature affected by MINOR
      GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M), OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M), 
      GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (6M) or ANTIMAGIC SHELL (6M) is immune to
      the effects of this spell. This spell can be resisted by magic
      resistance. This is the Cleric's version of Dispel, it has a
      longer casting time, but a Cleric can cast more. See also
      EXALTATION (3C), REMOVE PARALYSIS (3C), INVISIBILITY PURGE (3CD),
      DETECT INVISIBILITY (2M), RESIST FEAR (2M), REMOVE FEAR (1CD).


L3-08 : DISPEL MAGIC
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round 
Effect : Dispels all magical effects of spells, potions and (spells cast
      from) magical items on every creature within 15 feet of cast
      point. Fire Seeds (FIRE SEEDS (6D)) and Goodberries (GOODBERRY
      (2D)) in the inventories of characters in the affected area, are
      also dispelled. Magical effects caused by the wearing of magical
      items are unaffected. This spell cannot dispel the effects of
      healing spells or damage caused by attack spells. It cannot dispel
      fatigue caused by HASTE (3M) or RIGHTEOUS WRATH OF THE FAITHFUL
      (5C), although it can dispel that caused by BLOOD RAGE (4nonlawC).

      As a general rule, any magical effect on a creature that is
      permanent over time cannot be dispelled. While any effect that has
      a duration is dispellable.

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2
Comments : One of the most powerful spell in Icewind Dale because it
      affects almost all spells and has no saving throw. It can be used
      to dispel beneficial spells on enemies and/or harmful spells on
      your party. If your party has alot of Warriors, you'll love this
      spell. If you don't, you'll hate it. A creature affected by MINOR
      GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M), OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M), 
      GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (6M) or ANTIMAGIC SHELL (6M) is immune to
      the effects of this spell. This spell can be resisted by magic
      resistance. This is the Mage's version of Dispel, it has a shorter
      casting time than the Cleric's version. See also EXALTATION (3C),
      REMOVE PARALYSIS (3C), INVISIBILITY PURGE (3CD), DETECT
      INVISIBILITY (2M), RESIST FEAR (2M), REMOVE FEAR (1CD).


L3-10 : EXALTATION
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature other than the caster
Range : Touch
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Cures and prevents fear, sleep, feeblemind, unconcious, 
      intoxication, berserk and confused states of mind. The target
      becomes immune to the following spells and effects.
             1. SLEEP (1M)
             2. COMMAND (1C)
             3. COLOR SPRAY (1M) (creatures whose level are not greater
                   than the caster)
             4. HORROR (2M)
             5. STINKING CLOUD (2M)
             6. RIGID THINKING (3C)
             7. berserk caused by BELTYN'S BURNING BLOOD (4M)
             8. BLOOD RAGE (4nonlawC)
             9. CLOAK OF FEAR (4C)
            10. CONFUSION (7C/4M)
            11. EMOTION FEAR (4M)
            12. chance unconcious, SMASHING WAVE (4D)
            13. CHAOS (5M) 
            14. FEEBLEMIND (5M)
            15. GREATER COMMAND (5C)
            17. Umber Hulk Gaze (confuse)
            16. Jackalwere Gaze (unconcious)
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : A unique protection spell. This spell is best cast on your
      Mage and/or Druid for extra protection in hard battles. This can
      also be used to enable your Fighter to safely move in areas
      affected by Stinking Cloud (2M), or to fight against Umber Hulks
      or Jackalweres. See also RESIST FEAR (2M), REMOVE FEAR (1CD). 

	 
L3-11 : FIREBALL 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster 
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Caster points finger and says the distance and height. A ball
      of fire then flies to the area and explode causing [casterlevel x 
      [1 to 6]] fire damage to everyone within 20 feet of cast point. 
      This spell maxes out at level 10, with a maximum average damage of
      35.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to take only half of damage
Obtain from : 
      1. Snake Statue, first level, Dragon's Eye
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : This spell does damage on a very large area. A spell best
      used when faced with multiple opponents. Sometimes it's acceptable
      to hit 1 or 2 party members if you get to hit a large number of
      opponents along with them. You can also cast this spell near
      enemies to inflict damage on them from beyond visual range (to
      avoid retaliation). See also PROTECTION FROM FIRE (3CD), SKULL
      TRAP (3M), SPIKE GROWTH (3D), GLYPH OF WARDING (3C), SNILLOC'S
      SNOWBALL SWARM (2M).


L3-12 : FLAME ARROW
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Enables the caster to hurl [integer of [casterlevel / 5]] fiery
      arrows at an enemy. Each bolt does 1 to 6 piercing damage and 4 to
      24 fire damage, save vs spells to suffer half damage (fire only).

      Number or arrows/damage progression :  
            a. Level 5 caster, 1 bolt (combined average damage of 17.5)
            b. Level 10, 2 bolts, (35 damage)
            c. Level 15, 3 bolts, (52.5 damage)
            d. Level 20, 4 bolts, (70 damage)
            e. Level 25, 5 bolts, (87.5 damage)
            f. Level 30, 6 bolts, (105 damage)

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Bookshelf, 4rth level, Dragon's Eye
Comments : A projectile spell that does alot of damage. Use directly to
      damage enemies. This spell is best learned by Bards, who level up
      alot faster than Mages. This is best used on high priority targets
      like spellcasters, powerful ranged attackers to kill them quickly
      before they could do alot of damage. See also SKULL TRAP (3M),
      MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M), MAGIC MISSILE (1M), SUNSCORCH (1D).


L3-13 : GHOST ARMOR
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ summoning
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Creates a magical field of force around the target's body equal
      to the strength of a Plate Mail armor. While in effect, the 
      target's base AC is set to 3.
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Chest, southwest, first level, Temple of the Forgotten God
      2. Bookshelf, torture room, 5rth level, Dragon's Eye
Comments : A fast protection spell that can be used to protect a party
      member with poor AC in battle. This protection this spell gives is
      only slightly better that of SHIELD (1M) but its duration is alot
      shorter. BARKSKIN (2D) will eventually be better than this spell
      too, although its casting time is longer. See also PROTECTION FROM
      EVIL (1CD/1M).


L3-14 : GLYPH OF WARDING
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration, Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : A powerful inscription is magically drawn on the area. If any 
      creature comes to within 5(?) feet of it, everyone within 6(?)
      feet must save vs spells or suffer [[1 to 4] x [caster level]] 
      electrical damage. Victims can save vs spells to take only half 
      damage.

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 5 caster, 12.5 average damage  
            Level 10, 25 damage
            Level 15, 37.5 damage
            Level 20, 50 damage
            Level 25, 62.5 damage
            Level 30, 75 damage

Duration : Permanent until...
            a. Ward is set off
            b. Player rests
            c. Player leaves area
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : One of the few good Cleric attack spells. This spell is
      similar to the Mage's SKULL TRAP (3M), however it has an even
      smaller area of effect. You can stack as many Glyphs of Warding as
      you can, preferably near doorways (but with enough space to walk
      around them) where you can lure powerful enemies into them.
      However this spell is more conveniently used as an attack spell,
      cast directly on enemies. You cannot save your game if a Glyph of
      Warding is still active, if some Glyphs were not set off, you may
      have to set if off yourself (preferably with summoned creatures).
      Because of this, you have to be extra careful with using this
      spell. Cast it on stationary targets if possible or use ENTANGLE
      (1D), WEB (2M), and/or STINKING CLOUD (2M) to make them stop. See
      also SPIKE GROWTH (3D), FIREBALL (3M), SNILLOC'S SNOWBALL SWARM
      (2M).


L3-15 : HASTE 
Spells : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : Area
Range : Sight
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Friendly creatures within 20 feet of cast point are hasted. 
            1. Affected creatures have their attack rate doubled,
            2. Have their base movement doubled.
            3. If affected creatures are affected by a SLOW (3M) spell
                  at the time this spell is cast, then Slow is
                  dispelled.  
            4. Affected creatures suffer fatigue (-1 penalty to all
                  rolls, additional -1 penalty every 225 rounds without
                  rest) indefinitely after the spell expires. 
Duration : [casterlevel + 3] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Tomb on west side of main burial site level 1, Vale of
            Shadows
      2. Table, Presios' lair, 3rd level, Dragon's Eye
      3. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : The most powerful combat-support spell. This spell is the
      only spell that can increase a creature's attack rate to more than
      5 per round. This spell basically doubles the amount of physical
      damage your party can inflict, and is especially powerful for 
      parties composed mainly of Warriors. Dispelling Haste (with DISPEL
      MAGIC (3C/3M)) will not prevent the recipients from suffering 
      fatigue. Casting another Haste will not delay the fatigue either.
      This spell is generally reserved for really hard battles, and
      should not be used for easy ones unless you are near a resting
      place. It is usually best to memorize only 1 or 2 Haste spells (as
      you will need to rest afterwards anyway), if you want more
      combat-support spells, memorize SLOW (3M) instead. Another use of
      this spell is in blitzkrieg-ing an area, wherein you cast it along
      with lots of other combat-support spells and kill enemies on the
      map quickly before the spell expires, this a convenient way of
      clearing an area (just make sure to check the corpses for dropped
      items before leaving or resting). When casting Haste with other
      spells, cast Haste last, or one of the last (to maximize
      duration). Haste can also be dispelled by a (hostile) Slow spell.
      Level 15 (and higher) Druids never suffer fatigue.


L3-16 : HOLD ANIMAL
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : 1 to 4 animals within 20 feet if cast po?nt become paralyzed, 
      they cannot move, attack or defend.
Duration : [casterlevel x 2] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 5, Rangers at level 12
Comments : Good for killing dangerous animals. As far as I can tell, 
      people are unaffected by this spell. Also strange animals, or
      animals with mutations (in short, animals you won't find in your
      local zoo) are not affected. Held creatures will always get hit so 
      don't hesitate to attack them with ranged weapons, even with weak
      characters. See also ICELANCE (3M), WEB (2M), GHOUL TOUCH (2M),
      CHROMATIC ORB (1M), CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL (2D).


L3-17 : HOLD PERSON
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect :  1 to 4 (average of 2.5) hostile bipedal human, demihuman and/
      or humanoid. Targets must be man-size or smaller. Possible targets
      include Dwarves, Elves, Gnolls, Gnomes, Goblins, Half-Elves,
      Halflings, Half-Orcs, Hobgoblins, Humans, Lizard Men, Orcs,
      Troglodytes and others. 
Duration : [casterlevel x 2] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2 and 4
Comments : Powerful disabling spell against people, making them 
      helpless in battle, practically dead. Held people will always get
      hit so don't hesitate to target them with ranged weapons, even 
      with weak characters. Clerics also have this spell, but as a level
      2 spell. See also CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL (2D), CHARM PERSON (1M),
      ICELANCE (3M), HOLD ANIMAL (3D), WEB (2M), GHOUL TOUCH (2M),
      CHROMATIC ORB (1M).


L3-18 : HOLY SMITE
Spell : Non-evil(?) Clerics, Paladins
School : Necromancy
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Calls upon energy from the Plane of Brilliance and opens a
      channel between it and the targets.
            1. All evil creatures within 20 feet of cast point suffer 
                  [[1 to 6] x [integer of [casterlevel / 2]], 
                  casterlevel set to 10 if greater] magic damage. 
                  (Maximum average damage of 17.5.)
            2. And become blinded (-4 penalty to AC, -4 penalty to
                  THAC0) for 1 round.
Duration : See effects 
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid being blinded and suffer only half
      damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : A very weak area damage spell. This spell is easy to use if
      your party doesn't have any evil members. Although you might be
      surprised about how few evil creatures you actually fight. See
      also UNHOLY BLIGHT (3nongoodC), GLYPH OF WARDING (3C), DETECT EVIL
      (2M/1CD).


L3-19 : ICELANCE
Spell : Mages, Bards 
School : Evocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Fires a magical lance of ice that always hits.
            1. The lance does 5 to 30 cold damage (average of 17.5).
            2. Target must save vs spells or be stunned (frozen, I 
                  assume) (cannot move/attack/cast/defend) for 1 to 4 
                  rounds (average of 2.5). 
Duration : See effect
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Bookshelf, torture room, 5th level, Dragon's Eye
      2. Second floor of Corellon tower (war room), Hand of the 
            Seldarine (Severed Hand)
      3. Edion Caradoc, Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
      4. Crate, south of fourth dungeon beneath the keep (the one with 
            Jackalweres), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : Unlike LANCE OF DISRUPTION (3M), this spell doesn't have an
      area-effect. An alternative to HOLD PERSON (3M/2C) that works on
      any creature. See also ALICORN LANCE (2D), CHROMATIC ORB (1M).


L3-20 : INVISIBILITY PURGE
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Divination
Target : Area 
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : Dispels any invisibility, and reveals hidden creatures within
      sight range of the caster. This spell doesn't affect friendly or
      neutral creatures.   
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 5, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 12
Comments : Invisible creatures cannot be attacked directly, and might be
      able to come close to vulnerable party members. Stealthed thieves
      can backstab inflict lots of damage in one hit. DISPEL MAGIC
      (3C/3M) can also dispel invisibilities but not Stealth/ Hide in
      Shadows. See also DETECT INVISIBILITY (2M), NON-DETECTION (3M).


L3-21 : LANCE OF DISRUPTION 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Invocation
Target : Angle 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Creates a lance of force, 60 feet extending from the caster. 
      Creatures in the lance's path suffer [casterlevel x 2] + [5 to 20]
      blunt damage, up to 30 + [5 to 20] (maximum average damage of
      42.5).
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spell to take only half of damage
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : Unlike LIGHTNING BOLT (3M) or ICELANCE (3M), you don't have
      to have a target to cast this spell. You can cast it in the right
      direction to inflict damage on enemies from beyond visual range,
      to avoid retaliation. You can also this spell for it's line-area
      damage in the same way you would use AGANNAZAR'S SCORCHER (2M).


L3-22 : LIGHTNING BOLT
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Releases a powerful stroke of electrical energy. Lightning bolt
      does [casterlevel] x [1 to 6] electrical damage up to a maximum of
      10 to 60 (average of 35) to the target, then to anyone in its
      path. It will continually bounce off walls until dissipated. 
Duration : Until it dissipates
Avoidance : Save vs spell to take only half of damage, per hit
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2 annd 4
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments :  The first path of the lightning bolt to the target doesn't 
      inflict damage to anyone in its path (except the target), which
      means casting it on a target in front of your party won't damage
      your party. The damage this spell does is erratic, sometimes the
      bolt goes back and forth through the enemies doing tremendous
      damage, sometimes it deflects somewhere never to return. One way
      of using this spell is to send a stealth thief until he finds the
      enemies, move back a little, then drop something (like 1 arrow).
      You can use that item as a target to make the lightning jump off
      it (as you need a target). This spell is best used in tight
      places. Oh, and don't cast this too close to a target, it won't
      follow through.


L3-23 : MISCAST MAGIC
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 Mage
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Target's spellcasting ability is very adversely affected, and
      gains an 80% chance of failure to cast spells. Clerics and 
      Druids are unaffected by this spell (since they really don't cast 
      spells, they pray to their god/draw from nature).
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells with -2 penalty to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : A powerful anti-mage spell that is usually cast at the 
      start of a battle. See also SILENCE '15 (2C), MELF'S ACID ARROW 
      (2M).


L3-24 : MOLD TOUCH
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Infects target with rapid-spreading brown mold. 
            a. If target fails a saving throw vs spells, it suffers...
                  Second round : 4 to 24 magic damage 
                  Third round :  3 to 18  
                  Fourth round : 2 to 12 
                  Fifth  round : 1 to  6 
                  (total average damage of 35)
            b. Otherwise...
                  Second round : 2 to 12 damage
                  Third round :  1 to  6 damage
                  Fourth round : 1 to  6 damage
                  (total average damage of 14)
      Every round after the first, the nearest creature must make a save
      vs spells or be infected at full strength. The process continues 
      until the mold fails to infect anyone. Affected creatures can only
      infect other creatures if they are within a certain range 
      (5 feet?). This spell can affect friendly creatures.
Duration : See effect
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 5, Rangers at level 12
Comments : Contrary to game data, infected creatures can still be 
      infected again by another creature that got its infection from the
      original creature. This spell is hard to use as it can infect 
      friendly creatures as well. At higher levels, you can cast this on
      summoned creatures (such as animals from ANIMAL SUMMONING series
      of spells), wait for the mold to spread among them (keeping your
      party's distance), then send them (controlled by a stealth Thief/
      invisible character) to attack your enemies to infect them too
      (...and you can also kiss that next druid promotion goodbye!). 
      This spell is considered a form of disease so Paladins are immune
      to it (although the undead are not). This spell can also be cured
      with CURE DISEASE (3C), although I would'nt do that because it
      (sometimes?) causes a bug where you can't rest in Inns (thinks a
      spell is active?).


L3-25 : MONSTER SUMMONING I ( MONSTER SUMMONING 1 ) 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster (slightly less)
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Summons 2 to 6 first-level monsters under your control, usually  
      Goblins armed with bows/axes, or Fire Beetles. 
Duration : [casterlevel + 2] rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : Maximum 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :  
      1. Snake Statue, first level, Dragon's Eye
      2. Bookshelf, 4rth level, Dragon's Eye
Comments : This spell can be cast relatively fast although the monsters
      it summons are pretty weak. This spell is best used to attack
      undefended spellcasters or missile-users from behind. Goblins drop
      their weapons when they die so you could use this spell to get
      arrows if your supply is low but have a safe place to rest. See 
      also ANIMATE DEAD (3C).


L3-26 : MOONBLADE
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Invocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Caster summons forth and is equipped with a moonblade, a 
      silent, weightless, sword-like construct made of moonlight. An 
      ethereal weapon that drains vitality (not really) and scrambles 
      magic.
            1. The moonblade has no THAC0 bonus.
            2. Strength bonuses (to hit/damage) do not apply when using
                  this weapon.
            3. It is considered +4 magical weapon for determining what 
                  it can hit.
	      4. Each successful strike does 5 to 16 magic damage (average
                  of 10.5) unless the target is an undead in which case
                  it does 6 to 28 magic damage (average of 17).
            5. A sucessful hit from this weapon causes any spell, cast
                  in the following round by the victim to fail.
Duration : 20 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 5, Rangers at level 12
Comments : A powerful spell against the undead and spellcasters if the
      caster is a Ranger, Fighter-Druid or a Cleric-Ranger. See also
      BEAST CLAW (2D), FLAME BLADE (2D), SHILLELAGH (1D).


L3-27 : NON-DETECTION
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Prevents INVISIBILITY PURGE (3CD), DETECT INVISIBILITY (2M)
      from working on the target.
Duration : [casterlevel x 70] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Locked chest, 5th level, Dragon's Eye
Comments : A spell you probably won't need. This spell can be dispelled
      with a DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M). If the target was affected
      with INVISIBILITY (2M) or SANCTUARY (1C), they will be dispelled
      too. When using this spell, cast it on the would-be invisible
      creature before he becomes invisible, otherwise you won't be able
      to cast it as you can't cast single-target spells on invisible
      creatures.


L3-28 : PRAYER
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Bestows favor to allies, curses enemies. All creatures within
      60 feet of the caster are affected as follows;
            1. Friendly creatures (including the caster) gain...
                  1. +1 bonus to THAC0.
                  2. +1 damage to physical attacks.
                  3. +1 bonus to all saving throws.
            2. Hostile creatures receive...
                  1. -1 penalty to THAC0.
                  2. -1 damage to physical attacks.
                  3. -1 penalty to all saving throws.
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds 
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : A good combat support spell. When using this spell, always
      cast it after the start of a battle, where enemies are within
      range. The effects of this spell is cumulative with other combat
      support spells, and as such is best used with them. This spell can
      be cast without dispelling an existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on the
      caster. See also See also HASTE (3M), SLOW (3M), BLESS (1CD),
      CURSE (1CD), CHANT (2C)


L3-29 : PROTECTION FROM FIRE
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Target is protected from fire.
            1. Target becomes completely immune to non-magical fires.
            2. Target gains 80% resistance to magical fire.
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 5, Rangers and 
      Paladins at level 12
Comments : A defensive spell with a long duration. This spell is usually
      cast on your pointman when fighting fire-causing opponents such as
      Burning Skeletons, Salamanders, Fire Elementals, etc. Sometimes,
      casting FIREBALL (3M) near/at your pointman becomes an option when
      facing multiple opponents that are about to reach your more
      vulnerable party members, this spell lessens the amount of damage
      he takes. Unlike RESIST FIRE/RESIST COLD (2C), this spell is not
      cummulative with itself; but is cummulative with the former and
      lasts far longer. See also STORM SHELL (3D), CLOUDBURST (3D).


L3-30 : PROTECTION FROM NORMAL MISSILES
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Makes the target completely invulnerable to non-magical
      missiles (arrows, bolts, bullets, etc).
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds 
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Chest in small room, first level of Dragon's Eye
      2. Table on first (accessable) floor of Labelas tower (Mages), 
            Hand of the Seldarine (Severed Hand)
      3. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A defensive spell with a long duration. This spell is best on
      front characters (who'll usually take the blunt of projectiles). 
      You can also cast this on spellcasters to prevent (some) missile
      users from disrupting them. Non-magical missiles are those
      missiles that don't have any plus (ie. +1,+2). The term 
      non-magical refers to the ammunition not the launcher. See also
      GHOST ARMOR (3M), BARKSKIN (2D), PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M), 
      SHIELD (1M).


L3-31 : REMOVE CURSE
Spell : Clerics, Paladin
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 character (wearing a cursed item)
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .6 round 
Effect : Cursed items target is wearing is unequipped and placed in 
      target's inventory. 
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Some cursed items can only be removed by a caster of 
      sufficient level
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : Cursed items cannot be removed when worn, the only way to 
      remove it is with this spell (or with the "QUICK RELOAD" spell). A
      curse cannot be removed from an item. Cursed items usually have 
      properties that greatly degrades the wearer's ability. Some cursed
      items though are also powerful, and might be worth wearing and you
      need this spell when you want them removed. See also IDENTIFY 
      (1M).


L3-32 : REMOVE PARALYSIS
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Friendly creatures that are held, paralyzed, webbed, greased,
      within 20(?) feet of cast point are now able to move normally
      again.
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : A life saving spell. You might want to have one Remove
      Paralysis spell memorized at all times, or just buy Remove
      Paralysis scrolls for emergencies. In combat, when one of your
      characters is paralyzed, chances are that he's as good as dead.
      Remove Paralysis won't cure stunned or hopeless characters. Remove
      Paralysis won't work on hostile creatures. DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M)
      can also remove paralysis although it will remove everything too.


L3-33 : RIGID THINKING
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Target has trouble thinking; wanders around/ attacks nearest
      creature/ stands confused.
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effects
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : A convenient single-target disabling spell. Unlike HOLD
      PERSON (3M/2C), HOLD ANIMAL (3D), or MISCAST MAGIC (3C), this
      spell will affect any target, making them useless in battle. 
      Creatures affected by EXALTATION (3C) are immune to this spell.


L3-34 : SKULL TRAP 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromantic
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : A skull is thrown and floats over an area. It remains there 
      until someone comes to 5 feet of it, in which case it will 
      detonate and do [casterlevel] x [1 to 6] magic damage to everyone
      within a 10-foot-radius. Creatures caught in the blast can save vs
      breath weapon to take only half damage.

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 5 caster, 17.5 average damage
            Level 10, 35 damage
            Level 15, 52.5 damage
            Level 20, 70 damage
            Level 25, 87.5 damage
            Level 30, 105 damage

Duration : Permanent until...
            a. Detonated
            b. Player rests
            c. Player leaves area
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Bookshelf in library, Temple of the Forgotten God
      2. Table, Presios' lair, 3rd level, Dragon's Eye
Comments : A high damage area-effect spell. This spell is best learned
      by Bards, who level up alot faster than Mages. You can stack as
      many Skull Traps as you can where enemies will move (or sometimes
      appear from nowhere) before the battle starts, inflicting an awful
      amount of damage in an instant. However this spell is more
      conveniently used as an attack spell, cast directly on enemies 
      (detonating it instantaneously). You cannot save your game if a
      Skull Trap is still active, if some Skull Traps were not
      detonated, you may have to set if off yourself (preferably with
      summoned creatures). Because of this, you have to be extra careful
      when using this spell. Cast it on stationary targets if possible
      or use ENTANGLE (1D), WEB (2M), and/or STINKING CLOUD (2M) to make
      them stop. See also SPIKE GROWTH (3D), GLYPH OF WARDING (3C),
      FIREBALL (3M), SNILLOC'S SNOWBALL SWARM (2M).


L3-35 : SLOW
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Hostile creatures within 20 feet of cast point are slowed.     
            1. Affected creatures have their attack rate reduced by
                  half,
            2. Have their base movement reduced by half,
            3. Receive a -4 penalty to their AC,
            4. Receive a -4 penalty to their THAC0.
            5. If affected creatured are affected by a HASTE (3M) spell
                  at the time this spell is cast, then Haste is
                  dispelled.   
Duration : [casterlevel + 3] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells with -4 penalty to avoid effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2 and 4
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : A very powerful defensive/combat-support spell that's hard to 
      avoid. The spell to use when you're taking a (physical) beating
      from your enemies, it's easy to use because it's fast and won't
      affect friendly creatures. It's also the best way to deal against
      hasted enemies. Although not as powerful as Haste, it doesn't have
      any penalties either. See also PRAYER (3C), HORROR (2M), BLINDNESS
      (2M), ALICORN LANCE (2D), CURSE (1CD), CHILL TOUCH (1M), CHANT
      (2C). 


L3-36 : SPIKE GROWTH
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Terrain within 15 feet of cast point is transformed into spiky
      plants. Creatures on the affected area suffer...
            1. 1 to 4 piercing damage (average of 2.5) every round
            2. 1 to 4 slashing damage (average of 2.5) every round
            (Maximum average damage of 50 over 10 rounds, per victim.)
Duration : 10 rounds 
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 5, Rangers at level 12
Comments : This spell is a very powerful spell that can inflict damage
      to all types of creatures, if not most. The effects of two or more
      Spike Growths are cummulative. This spell works even better with
      WEB (2M), STINKING CLOUD (2M), ENTANGLE (1D) and/or GREASE (1M).
      You can also cast this spell near enemies to inflict damage on
      them from beyond visual range (to avoid retaliation). This spell
      has a long duration and therefore should not be used in easy
      battles (you can't save while active). See also SKULL TRAP (3M),
      GLYPH OF WARDING (3C), FIREBALL (3M), SNILLOC'S SNOWBALL SWARM
      (2M).


L3-37 : STORM SHELL
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Caster is surrounded with dark sphere of disruptive energy that
      reduces fire, cold and electrical damage by 50%.
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 5, Rangers at level 12
Comments : A spell that can give immunity to fire, cold and electricity.
      The effects of two or more Storm Shell spells are cummulative, 
      giving up to 127 resistance. See also PROTECTION FROM FIRE (3CD),
      RESIST FIRE/RESIST COLD (2C).


L3-38 : STRENGTH OF ONE
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Alteration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Every friendly creature within 25 feet of the caster (including
      the caster) have their strength set to 18/76 (+2 to hit, +4 
      damage).
Duration : 7 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5, Paladins at level 12
Comments : An instant strength spell for weak parties. This spell is
      usually used when your party has been surrounded or has been 
      scattered forcing weak members are to engage in melee combat. It
      can also be used as a cheap way of increasing the ability to
      inflict damage of (most) summoned creatures. Players with parties
      composed mainly of Warriors though, would probably think this 
      spell are for wimps only.


L3-39 : UNHOLY BLIGHT
Spell : Non-good(?) Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Calls upon energy from the Negative Material Plane and opens a
      channel between it and the targets. 
            a. All creatures of good alignment within 20 feet of cast
                  point must save vs spells or...
                  1. Suffer [[1 to 6] x [integer of [casterlevel / 2]],
                  casterlevel set to 10 if greater] magic damage 
                  (maximum average damage of 17.5).
                  2. Recieve a -2 penalty to THAC0, -2 penalty to
                  physical damage dealt and a -2 penalty to all saving
                  throws. This lasts for 3 rounds.
            b. Otherwise they only suffer half of the damage mentioned
                 above (a1). (Maximum average damage of 8.75)  
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
      damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 5
Comments : A very weak area damage spell. This spell is easy to use if
      your party doesn't have any members of good alignment. See also
      HOLY SMITE (3nonevilC), GLYPH OF WARDING (3C).


L3-40 : VAMPIRIC TOUCH
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : The caster casts this spell then touches the target, draining
      its life. The target suffers magic damage, while the caster's
      maximum hitpoints is increased by that same amount for 56.25
      rounds (1 hour) and is healed by the same amount. The amount of
      hitpoints drained is [[1 to 6] x [integer of [casterlevel / 2]],
      casterlevel set to 12 if greater].

      Drain progression :
            a. Level 5 caster, average of of 7 hitpoints drained
            b. Level 6, 10.5 drained
            c. Level 8, 14 drained
            d. Level 10, 17.5 drained
            e. Level 12, 21 drained

Duration : See effect
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Table, Presios' lair, 3rd level, Dragon's Eye
Comments : A spell that can drastically increase the caster's 
      (otherwise pathetic) life. The effects of two or more Vampiric
      Touch spells are cumulative. You can cast it on summoned
      creatures, other characters or even on the caster himself (heal
      afterwards) to increase the caster's hitpoints before combat.
      Ofcourse, enemies are always preferable. Hitpoints above the
      caster's maximum can be dispelled by DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M). See
      also LARLOCH'S MINOR DRAIN (1M), AID (2C), SHOCKING GRASP (1M).





---
LEVEL 4 SPELLS


L4-01 : ANIMAL SUMMONING I ( ANIMAL SUMMONING 1 )
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Summons 2(?) to 6 (average of 4) level 4 or below animals to
      aid you. The animals are under your control, mostly Black Bears or
      Wolves.
Duration : 50 rounds or until killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 7, Rangers at level 15
Comments : This spell is best used to provide cannon fodder protection
      for spellcasters and other weak members. This spell lasts long 
      enough to be cast before a battle starts. The creatures this spell
      summons are generally tough enough to withstand attacks for some
      time. They should be cast to block open paths to vulnerable
      characters. See also GIANT INSECT (4D), SHADOW MONSTERS (4M),
      MONSTER SUMMONING II (4M).


L4-02 : BELTYN'S BURNING BLOOD
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Turns the target's blood into flame. Each round for [integer of
      [casterlevel / 2]] rounds, the target must save vs spells or
      suffer 3 to 12 fire damage (average of 7.5) and go berserk 
      (attacks nearest creature with best melee weapon, bare hands if
      none available) for 1 round.

      Duration progression :
            a. Level 7 caster, save every round for 3 rounds
            b. Level 8, 4 rounds
            c. Level 10, 5 rounds
            d. Level 12, 6 rounds
            e. Level 14, 7 rounds
            f. Level 16, 8 rounds
            g. Level 18, 9 rounds
            h. Level 20, 10 rounds
            i. Level 22, 11 rounds
            j. Level 24, 12 rounds
            k. Level 26, 13 rounds
            l. Level 28, 14 rounds
            m. Level 30, 15 rounds

Duration : See effect
Avoidance : None/See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Table, third floor, Sheverash Tower (where Kaylessa is), Hand
            of the Seldarine (Severed Hand)
Comments : An anti-spellcaster/ranged attacker spell. The effects of two
      or more Burning Blood spells are cummulative. The spell does not
      expire when a save is made. This spell is be used on spellcasters
      to continually try to disrupt them. It is best learned by Bards,
      who level up alot faster than Mages. MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M) is
      usually better than this spell, although this spell can penetrate
      a MINOR GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M). Creatures affected by
      EXALTATION (3C) and this spell do not go berserk, although they
      still suffer the fire damage. See also VITRIOLIC SPHERE (4M), MOLD
      TOUCH (3D), MISCAST MAGIC (3C), SILENCE 15' RADIUS (2C).

 
L4-03 : BLOOD RAGE
Spell : Non-lawful Clerics
School : Alteration
Target : 1 allied non-lawful creature 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : The target goes berserk (big time).
            1. Target is uncontrollable, and attacks nearest creature 
                  regardless of whether they are friends or enemies.
            2. Target becomes immune to stunning, confusion, emotion,
                  symbol spells and related effects.
            3. Gains +2 to strength, values between 18 and 19 increase
                  by increments of 10%(?) exceptional strength.
            4. Gains +2 to hit, +3 to damage, +10 to maximum hitpoints.
            5. Target's hitpoints is masked. The target's HP is 
                  displayed as "-/-", it still changes color depending
                  on amount of HP;
                        a. white  - full
                        b. green  - barely damaged
                        c. yellow - moderately damage
                        d. red    - critically damage... etc.
            6. After the spell expires, 
                  1. The target has his strength set to 3 (5 lbs weight 
                        allowance, -3 to hit, -1 damage) for 20 rounds.
                  2. Suffers from fatigue (-1 to all rolls) for 20
                        rounds.
Duration : 20 rounds
Avoidance : None 
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7
Comments : A spell that increases damage dealt and gives powerful
      immunities. This spell also makes the target immune to a Wailing
      Virgin's songs. This is best used on tough summoned creatures such
      as elementals because you don't lose control of them (summoned
      creatures). This spell works even better with a strength setting
      spell such as STRENGTH (2M). And since the target will suffer
      fatigue anyway, you can always add in a HASTE (3M) spell (target
      only). The advantage of using this spell on a party member is that
      the character can drink a powerful strength enhancing potion (oh
      I don't know maybe a POTION OF CLOUD GIANT STRENGTH (23 str)). My
      only advice with this is; keep a DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M) handy, and
      make sure you're miles away from him. Dispel Magic or EXALTATION
      (3C) can dispel this spell, including the fatigue penalty. 
      Exaltation also makes a creature immune to this spell. See also
      CAT'S GRACE (2M), AID (2C). 


L4-04 : CAUSE SERIOUS WOUNDS (Reverse of CURE SERIOUS WOUNDS)
Spell : Non-good Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The caster touches the targer then casts this spell, causing 17
      magic damage.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to suffer only half damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7
Comments : A very weak attack spell. This spell is hard to use because
      it has a long casting time, and because it doesn't do alot of
      damage. This spell also doesn't work on non-living creatures,
      including the undead. See also POISON (4evilC), CAUSE MODERATE
      WOUNDS (2nongoodC), CAUSE LIGHT WOUNDS (1nongoodC).


L4-05 : CLOAK OF FEAR 
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : The caster gains a fear-causing aura. Any creature within 3 
      feet of the caster must save vs spells every round or flee in 
      panic (cannot attack/cast spells, runs around/stands still 
      randomly) for 2 to 16 rounds (average of 9). 
Duration : 3 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7, Paladins at level 15
Comments : This spell can be cast without dispelling an existing
      SANCTUARY (1C) spell on the caster. It has a short range, but
      creatures within its range must save up to 3 times, greatly
      increasing the chance of success. The average duration of fear
      caused by this spell is almost the same as that caused by a HORROR
      (2M) spell. If you want to protect friendly characters from the
      effects of this spell, use RESIST FEAR (2M) or REMOVE FEAR (1CD).
      This spell can also be used simply to fend off melee enemies away
      from the caster. The undead are immune to fear, although the
      caster's TURN UNDEAD ability produces a similar effect.


L4-06 : CLOUD OF PESTILENCE
Spell : Evil Clerics
School : Alteration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Transforms the air within 20 feet of cast point into sickening,
      greyish mists. Any living creature (excluding the caster) within
      the area of effect must save vs breath weapon every round or ...
            1. Lose 3 points of strength, 3 points of dexterity and 
                 suffer blindness (-4 penalty to AC and THAC0) for 10
                 rounds. This effect is cummulative, including the
                 penalties from blindness ! 
            2. Suffer 3 magic damage.
Duration : 4 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7
Comments : The best evil cleric spell !! This spell turns enemies into
      punching bags, greatly decreasing their ability to hit, defend, 
      and to move (encumbrance). The effects of 2 or more Cloud of
      Pestilence spells are cummulative. Although the caster can act as
      bait (since he is immune to the spell - maybe evil clerics are
      vaccinated from sickening things), it is usually best to use this
      spell with WEB (2M), STINKING CLOUD (2M), ENTANGLE (1D) and/or
      GREASE (1M). Because being bait is not exactly good for casting
      spells. Another way of using this spell is to lure enemies with
      a Warrior, cast OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M) on him, then cast
      a number of this spell over them and attack the enemies with
      ranged weapons. See also SLOW (3M).


L4-07 : CONFUSION
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Causes confusion to hostile creatures within 30 feet of cast
      point, creating indecision and inability to take effective action.
      Affected creatures randomly...
            a. Attack nearest creature
            b. Stand still
            c. Walk aimlessly
Duration : [casterlevel + 2] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells with -2 penalty, to avoid effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Table, Presios' lair, 3rd level, Dragon's Eye
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A powerful defensive spell. This spell is similar to RIGID
      THINKING (3C), except it has an area-effect. This spell can
      drastically reduce the amount of physical damage your party is
      taking, it also prevents enemy spellcasters from casting spells.
      The downside is, it doesn't work againts the undead, including
      shadowed or ghostly creatures. For maximum effect, cast this spell
      after RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD) (GREATER
      MALISON (4M) not included because it's better to just cast this
      level 4 spell multiple times instead). Note that this spell makes
      the enemies a little unpredictable, so take caution to keep 
      vulnerable party members away from the front lines. See also
      HORROR (2M), EMOTION FEAR (4M).


L4-08 : CURE SERIOUS WOUNDS
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : The caster lays his hand on the target then casts this spell,
      healing 17 points of damage. 
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 7, Paladins and
      Rangers at level 15
Comments : Healing spell. It's generally best to heal only characters
      with more damage than this spell heals. Front characters are
      usually the primary targets of this spell. See also CURE MODERATE
      WOUNDS (2CD), GOODBERRY (2D), CURE LIGHT WOUNDS (1CD), CURE
      DISEASE (3C).


L4-09 : DEFENSIVE HARMONY
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Enables every friendly creature within 10 feet of the caster
      (including the caster) to act like a single unit, improving the
      coordination of their attacks and tactics. Affected creatures gain
      +4 bonus to their AC.
Duration : 6 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7, Paladins at level 15
Comments : Quickly increases AC by a large amount. This spell is best
      cast during combat (not before), to affect front party members
      when being attacked by powerful melee opponents. Because of the
      short range of this spell, the caster should either be at the
      front lines or come near it. This spell can be cast without
      dispelling an existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on the caster. See
      also PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10' RADIUS (4C), RECITATION (4C), SLOW
      (3M), PRAYER (3C), CURSE (1CD), CHANT (2C).


L4-10 : DIMENSION DOOR
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Opens a dimensional portal, the caster immediately steps
      through it transporting him to cast point.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Bookshelf, torture room, 5th level, Dragon's Eye
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : A teleport spell used to enable your Mage to reach otherwise
      unreachable areas (there's one in HoW). This spell can also be
      used to quickly get your Mage out of harm's way although
      INVISIBILITY (2M) is better (and alot cheaper). See also OTILUKE'S
      RESILIENT SPHERE (4M), IMPROVED INVISIBLITY (4M).


L4-11 : EMOTION COURAGE
Spell : Mages, Bards 
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Creates the emotion of courage to all friendly creatures within
      10 feet of cast point. 
            1. Affected creatures gain a +1 bonus to THAC0.
            2. Gain +3 damage to physical attacks.
            3. Gain +5 to maximum life.
            4. Healed by 5 points.
            5. Removes fear if it exists, but does not protect from it.
Duration : 50 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Table, southwest, second floor, Hand of the Seldarine (Severed
            Hand)
      1. Chest, southeast at the top of Solonor tower (priests), Hand of
            the Seldarine (Severed Hand)
Comments : A combat support spell with a long duration. The effects of
      two or more Emotion Courage spells are cumulative. This spell is
      mainly used during hard battles to increase the damage inflicted
      by your party. Because of its long duration, it should be cast
      before the battle starts. This spell is usually used with HASTE
      (3M) and STRENGTH (2M) spells. See also EMOTION HOPE (4M),
      RECITATION (4C), SLOW (3M), PRAYER (3C), BLESS (1CD).


L4-12 : EMOTION FEAR
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster 
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Creates the emotion of fear in all hostile creatures 10 feet of
      cast point. Creatures affected cannot attack or cast spells, they
      randomly run around or stand still. 
Duration : 5 rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effects
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2
Comments : A fear-causing spell. Pound for pound, HORROR (2M) is a
      better spell than this. The effects of this spell is nullified by 
      RESIST FEAR (2M) or REMOVE FEAR (1CD). BLESS (1CD) increases the
      chance to save against this spell. The undead are immune to fear,
      although a Cleric or Paladin's TURN UNDEAD ability produces a
      similar effect. See also CLOAK OF FEAR (4C). 


L4-13 : EMOTION HOPE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time :  .4 round
Effect : Creates the emotion of hope in all friendly creatures within 10
      feet of cast point. 
            1. Affected creatures gain +2 bonus to their all saving
                  throws.
            2. Gain +2 bonus to their attack rolls.
            3. Gain +2 damage to their physical attacks.
Duration : 50 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :  
      1. Table, north of third level, Severed hand
Comments : A combat support spell with a long duration. The effects of
      this spell is similar to those of RECITATION (4C) and PRAYER (3C).
      The effects of two or more Emotion Hope spells are cummulative.
      Because of this spell's long duration, it should be cast before
      a battle starts. See also EMOTION COURAGE (4M), HASTE (3M), SLOW
      (3M), BLESS (1CD).


L4-14 : EMOTION HOPELESSNESS
Spell : Mages, Bards 
School : Enchantment/ Charm 
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Creates the emotion of hopelessness to all creatures within 10
      feet of cast point. Affected creatures stand still demoralized and
      do nothing, they don't move, attack, cast spells or even defend 
      themselves. 
Duration : 10 rounds 
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from :
      1. Broken table, North of first level, Severed Hand
      2. Crate, south of fourth dungeon beneath the keep (the one with 
            Jackalweres), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : A powerful disabling spell. This spell affects all creatures
      including friendly ones. When using it, treat it as you would a
      FIREBALL (3M). Characters affected by a FREE ACTION (4C) spell
      (not via RING OF FREE ACTION) are immune to this spell. You can
      use such characters to bait enemies while your Mage casts this
      spell. You can also use Skeletons/Zombies from ANIMATE DEAD
      (5M/3C) as the undead are immune the spell's effects. Hopelessness
      cannot be dispelled by REMOVE PARALYSIS (3C). Hopeless creatures
      will always get hit so don't hesitate to attack them with ranged
      weapons, even with weak characters. See also HOLD PERSON (3M/2C),
      ICELANCE (3M), HOLD ANIMAL (3D), WEB (2M), STINKING CLOUD (2M),
      GHOUL TOUCH (2M), CHROMATIC ORB (1M). 


L4-15 : FREE ACTION
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Allows the target target to move normally even when he is under
      the influence of magic that hinders movement.
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7, Paladins at level 15
Comments : A long-duration protection spell. This spell is mainly used
      on front characters to protect them from paralyzing spells. The
      effects of this spell is more potent than the effects of wearing a
      RING OF FREE ACTION (the ring doesn't protect againts Hopelessness
      or Stunned status). This spell will not make the target immune
      from HASTE (3M), although it will make him immune to the effects
      of wearing BOOTS OF SPEED. See also REMOVE PARALYSIS (3C), BLOOD
      RAGE (4nonlawC).


L4-16 : GIANT INSECT
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration 
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Summons 1 to 6 insects, then transforms them into giants. The
      giant insects are under your control, mostly Boring Beetles or
      Bombardier Beetles. 

      If the game follows AD&D rules on their levels...
            Level 7 caster, summons level 4 giant insects
            Level l0, level 5
            Level 13, level 6 

Duration : 450 rounds (8 hours)
Avoidance : Maximum 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 7, Rangers at level 15
Comments : This spell is best used by casting it behind enemies. 
      Bombardier Beetles regularly releases acid vapors around them, 
      inflicting acid damage and (has a chance to) stun creatures around
      them. Boring Beetles are (slightly) tougher than Bombardier
      Beetles. In any case, try not to come near Bombardier Beetles as
      their Release Acid Vapors ability usually brings more harm than 
      good, if you're close to them. See also SHADOW MONSTERS (4M), 
      ANIMAL SUMMONING I (4D), MONSTER SUMMONING II (4M).


L4-17 : GREATER MALISON
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : All hostile creatures within 30 feet of cast point receive -2
      penalty to all saving throws (-10 percent chance to save).
Duration : [casterlevel x 2] rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Table on first (accessable) floor of Labelas tower (Mages), 
            Hand of the Seldarine (Severed Hand)
Comments : A very powerful set-up spell. Unlike RECITATION (4C) or
      PRAYER (3C), the effects of 2 or more Greater Malison spells are
      cummulative. You can use this spell to bring down enemy saving
      throws to the point where enemies almost always fail their saves.
      This is important to many spells, but especially to spells like
      FINGER OF DEATH (7M), DESTRUCTION (7evilC), DISINTIGRATE (6M),
      FLESH TO STONE (6M), FEEBLEMIND (5M), SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC),
      DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL DOMINATION (4C). See also CURSE (1CD),
      CHANT (2C).


L4-18 : ICE STORM
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Shards of ice smash down on every creature within 20 feet of
      cast point. Creatures in the area of effect suffer 3 to 30 cold
      damage (average of 16.5).
Duration : 2 rounds, although creatures hit are not hit again
Avoidance : None
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 4
      2. Crate, south of fourth dungeon beneath the keep (the one with 
            Jackalweres), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : A spell that does damage on a very large area. A spell best
      used when faced with multiple opponents. Sometimes it's acceptable
      to hit 1 or 2 party members if you get to hit a large number of
      opponents along with them. You can also cast this spell near
      enemies to inflict damge on them from beyond visual range, to
      avoid retaliation. The damage this spell does is weaker than that
      of a FIREBALL (3M) spell, even if a save is made. The only thing
      better with this spell, is that there is more chance to hit
      creatures because it lasts for 2 rounds. See also PRODUCE FIRE
      (4D), SPIKE GROWTH (3D), SKULL TRAP (3M), FIREBALL (3M), GLYPH OF
      WARDING (3C), SNILLOC'S SNOWBALL SWARM (2M).


L4-19 : IMPROVED INVISIBILITY
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .4 round 
Effect : Target can attack and still remain invisible, although traces
      are noticable when specifically looked for.
            1. Target is ignored by enemies and cannot be attacked
                  directly until target...
                        a. Attacks
                        b. Casts any spell
                        c. Opens any chest or storage
                        d. Uses Pickpocket or Remove Trap skill
                  After which the target can then be noticed/attacked,
                  although this does not end the spell as in the case
                  of INVISIBILITY (2M). 
            2. If the target is a thief, he can backstab repeatedly
                  provided he can get behind enemies and is using a
                  weapon that can backstab.
            3. Attacks against the target receive -4 penalty to attack
                  roll.
            4. Saving throws made by the target are done with +4 bonus.   
Duration : [casterlevel + 4] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Table on first (accessable) floor of Labelas tower (Mages),
            Hand of the Seldarine (Severed Hand)
Comments : Super Backstab Spell !! Use a Warrior to distract enemies
      while your Thief repeatedly backstabs them. You can also cast
      SPIRIT ARMOR (4M), STRENGTH (2M), EMOTION COURAGE (4M), PRAYER
      (3C) on the Thief to increase his effectivity. The Thief can also
      drink strength-enhancing potions, the effects of which are often
      alot better than that of a Strength spell. Backstabbing is most
      useful against enemy spellcasters (who are usually behind stronger
      allies, where the invisibility comes handy) as they are easy to
      hit and have low hitpoints. Defensive backstabbing is also
      possible with this spell. That is, the Thief attacks normally (ie
      with ranged weapons) simply using the defensive qualities of the
      spell. But when one of your spellcasters is attacked (in melee),
      the Thief goes to backstab the attacker, either forcing him to
      attack the Thief instead or killing him quickly with continous
      multiplied damage. Some powerful creatures can see/sense even
      invisible creatures, they can notice and attack your invisible
      character as if he were visible. This doesn't affect the Thief's
      backstabbing abilities, although it's not exactly easy to backstab
      who's trying to face towards you. See also NON-DETECTION (3M),
      INVISIBILITY (2M).


L4-20 : MENTAL DOMINATION
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : The caster dominates the target's mind and is able to control
      his actions through a telepatic link.
Duration : [casterlevel x 3] rounds, or until target is attacked by 
      player's forces
Avoidance : Save vs spells with -2 penalty to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7, Paladins at level 15.
Comments : A good "charm" spell that's not restricted to people. It's
      usually best to send dominated creatures to go fight enemies to
      their deaths, keep them away from vulnerable party members. 
      Dominated creatures can only attack using their default weapons, 
      you cannot order them to cast spells or use thieving spells, etc.
      Dominated creatures are considered friendlies and spells like 
      BLESS (1CD) will affect them. This spell is considered a hostile
      spell, friendly creatures you dominated will turn hostile 
      afterwards. You can lower enemy saving throws with GREATER MALISON
      (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD). Creatures
      affected by PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M) or PROTECTION FROM EVIL
      10' RADIUS (4C) are immune to this spell. The undead are also
      immune to this spell. See also DIRE CHARM (3M), CHARM PERSON OR
      MAMMAL (2D), CHARM PERSON (1M).


L4-21 : MINOR GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Creates a faintly shimmering, magical sphere around the caster
      that prevents any first, second or third level spell from 
      penetrating (including beneficial spells), making the caster 
      immune to such spells. This includes innate abilities and effects
      from devices (such as traps). 
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Chest, second to the top level of Solonor tower (priests), Hand
            of the Seldarine (Severed Hand)
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : An anti-Dispel spell. This spell makes the caster immune to
      DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M), MISCAST MAGIC (3C), HOLD PERSON (3M/2C),
      SILENCE 15' RADIUS (2C), WEB (2M), STINKING CLOUD (3M), MELF'S
      ACID ARROW (2M), and other potentially devastating level 
      3-and-below spells. You can also use this spell to protect the
      caster while he purposely detonates traps to remove them (note
      that some traps cannot be disarmed by activation or cannot be 
      disarmed at all). Note that the use of this spell prevents the
      caster from casting MIRROR IMAGE (2M) or INVISIBILITY (2M) on
      himself. This spell will not protect the caster from attacks by
      creatures summoned by level-3-and-below spells. A Cleric-Mage can
      cast this spell without dispelling an existing SANCTUARY (1C)
      spell on him. See also STONESKIN (4M), VAMPIRIC TOUCH (3M), MIRROR
      IMAGE (2M), BLUR (2M), SHIELD (1M), OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE
      (4M).


L4-22 : MONSTER SUMMONING II ( MONSTER SUMMONING 2 )
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster (slightly less)
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Summons 1 to 6 second-level monsters under your control, mostly
      Goblin Elites with axes/halberds(?), Bombardier Beatles or Lizard
      Men.
Duration : [casterlevel + 3] rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : Maximum 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2 and 4
Comments : This spell can be cast relatively fast although the monsters
      it summons are weak. This spell is best used to attack undefended
      spellcasters or missile-users from behind. See also SHADOW
      MONSTERS (4M), GIANT INSECT (4D), ANIMAL SUMMONING I (4D).


L4-23 : MORDENKAINEN'S FORCE MISSILES 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Invocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Creates [[integer of [[casterlevel - 4] / 3], up to 7]
      brilliant globes of magical energy that streak unerringly towards
      the target. Each missile does 2 to 8 magic damage to the target
      (no saving throw). Then each missile explode doing [casterlevel]
      magic damage to every creature within 5 feet of the target
      (including the target), save vs spells to avoid damage this
      damage, per missile.

      Number of missiles/damage progression :
            a. Level 7 caster, 1 missile, combined average damage of 12
            b. Level 10, 2 missiles, 30 damage
            c. Level 13, 3 missiles, 54 damage
            d. Level 15, 4 missiles, 80 damage
            e. Level 18, 5 missiles, 115 damage
            f. Level 21, 6 missiles, 156 damage
            g. Level 25, 7 missiles, 210 damage
           (h. Level 30, 7 missiles, 245 damage)

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 4
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : The most powerful, if not one of the most powerful projectile
      spell. This spell is best learned by Bards, who level up alot
      faster than Mages. At high levels, one of this is usually enough
      to kill most opponents. This is usually used on high priority
      targets like spellcasters, powerful ranged attackers to kill them
      quickly before they could do alot of damage. Because of the high
      damage this spell does, it might be worth it to penalize the 
      enemies' saving throw first with GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION
      (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD). Creatures affected by SHIELD
      (1M) or GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (6M) are immune to this spell.
      Mordenkainen is a ridiculously powerful Mage (Human Male, level
      20, True Neutral, 10str, 17dex, 17con, 18int, 15wis, 18cha) in
      Greyhawk. He is a member of the Circle of Eight, a powerful group
      of (8) mages. Mordenkainen specializes in combat-related spells
      with more direct applications (especially for AD&D roleplayers -
      obviously a favorite of the writers)(ie. Mordenkainen's Disjuntion
      (9M), Mordenkainen's Magnificent Mansion (7M), Mordenkainen's
      Phantom Guardian (6M)). See also FLAME ARROW (3M), MELF'S ACID
      ARROW (2M), MAGIC MISSILE (1M), SUNSCORCH (1D).


L4-24 : NEUTRALIZE POISON
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : The caster lays his hand on the target then casts this spell,
      curing the target of any poison and healing him of 10 points of
      damage.
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance :  Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7, Paladins at level 15
Comments : Cures poison. A poisoned character takes damage continually
      for a certain duration. If the poison is potent, the character
      might not have sufficient life to bear the damage, and casting
      healing spells repeatedly is quite expensive. Also poison can (and
      will probably will) disrupt any spellcasting. The alternative to 
      using this spell is to drink an ANTIDOTE or ELIXIR OF HEALTH. See
      also CURE DISEASE (3C), SLOW POISON (2C).


L4-25 : OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round (?)
Effect : A globe of shimmering force, immune to all damage encloses the
      target. 
            1. The target cannot be damaged by physical attacks.
            2. Cannot be affected by any spell, including beneficial
                  spells (although it doesn't dispel or prevent damage
                  from existing spells and effects on the target). 
            3. Cannot affect others. He cannot move, attack, cast as if
                  he is held. 
Duration : 7 rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : 
      1. Second floor of Corellon tower (war room), Hand of the
            Seldarine (Severed Hand)
Comments : The ultimate protection spell. This spell can be used on any
      badly wounded character under attack, to prevent him from getting
      killed. Unlike SANCTUARY (1C), INVISIBILITY (2M) or IMPROVED
      INVISIBILITY (4M), this spell cannot be dispelled by DISPEL MAGIC
      (3C/3M), and the affected creature is still be able to draw the
      attention of enemies (they still attack the target). This spell
      can also be used on front characters (or summoned creatures) to
      make them immune to damage, so that spellcasters can throw in
      area-damage spells such as (among others) SKULL TRAPs (3M), SPIKE
      GROWTHs (3D), CLOUDs OF PESTILENCE (4evilC). Note that attacking
      (or failing a pickpocket attempt on) a neutral creature trapped by
      this spell will still cause that creature to become hostile after
      the spell expires. This can be avoided though, if your party
      leaves the area before the spell expires (cheater). Otiluke is a
      powerful Mage (Human Male, level 16, True Neutral, 5str (9 with
      magical gauntlets), 17dex, 10con, 17int, 8wis, 11cha) in Greyhawk.
      He is a member of the Circle of Eight, a powerful group of (8)
      mages. Otiluke specializes in spells that affect specific areas
      (ie. Otiluke's Telekinetic Sphere (7M), Otiluke's Death Screen
      (7M), Otiluke's Fire and Ice (7M)). See also STONESKIN (4M), MINOR
      GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M), MIRROR IMAGE (2M).


L4-26 : POISON (Reverse of NEUTRALIZE POISON)
Spell : Evil Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : The caster touches the target then casts this spell, afflicting
      him with poison. The target suffers 1 poison damage, 20 times over
      a period of about 3 rounds.
Duration : 3 rounds(?)
Avoidance : Save vs death to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7
Comments : The best level 4 cleric attack spell (yeah it's pretty lame).
      This spell can be used to kill Revenants. 


L4-27 : PRODUCE FIRE
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Flame erupts everywhere within 6 feet of cast point. Any 
      creature caught in the flame suffers [[1 to 4] + casterlevel] 
      fire damage (maximum average of 32.5). (It's suppose to be able to
      ignite combustible materials by AD&D rules)
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 7, Rangers at level 15
Comments : An area-effect spell only for high level casters. This spell
      does pathetic damage early on. Although, it has no saving throw
      and gets better with level, doing decent damage later. Use it
      againts fire-vulnerable creatures or to kill Trolls. See also
      FLAME BLADE (2D), SUNSCORCH (1D).


L4-28 : PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10' RADIUS (Protection from Evil, 10 Feet
     Radius)
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Casts Protection from Evil on every friendly creature within 10
      feet of the caster (inclding the caster). Protective magical
      barriers form around the affected creatures, moving with them.
            1. Affected creatures gain +2 bonus to their AC,
            2. Gain +2 bonus to all their saving throws,
            3. And gain immunity against...
                  1. CHARM PERSON (1M)
                  2. CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL (2D)
                  3. DIRE CHARM (3M)
                  4. MENTAL DOMINATION (4C)
                  5. DOMINATION (5M)
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds 
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7, Paladins at level 15.
Comments : A mainstay support spell. This spell has a very long duration
      and is definitely worth casting. When casting this spell, make
      sure your party is close enough to the caster. This spell is
      usually cast right after resting, or after you summon creatures
      before a hard battle. The Mage's PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M)
      spell is cummulative with this spell, the Cleric/Druid's version
      however is not. See also FREE ACTION (4C), PROTECTION FROM NORMAL
      MISSILES (3M), PROTECTION FROM FIRE (3CD), STRENGTH (2M), CAT'S
      GRACE (2M).


L4-29 : PROTECTION FROM LIGHTNING
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers 
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : The target becomes immune to electrical damage whether from
      natural or magical sources (gains 100 resistance against
      electricity). He becomes immune to the following spells.
            1. SHOCKING GRASP (1M)
            2. GLYPH Of WARDING (3C)
            3. LIGHTNING BOLT (3M)
            4. CALL LIGHTNING (3D)
            5. CLOUDBURST (4D), if the target is not a fire/cold
                  dwelling/using creature
            6. STATIC CHARGE (4D)
Duration : [casterlevel x 5] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 7, Paladins and
      Rangers at level 15
Comments : A not-so-needed protection spell. This spell is best used
     only in later levels when the duration is longer and your priest
     has more level 4 slots. This spell is usually cast on your front
     character, for added protection and so that you can cast CHAIN
     LIGHTNING (6M), GLYPH OF WARDING (3C) or LIGHTNING BOLT (3M) at the
     front area without damaging him. See also PROTECTION FROM FIRE
     (3CD), RESIST FIRE/RESIST COLD (2C).

     
L4-30 : RECITATION
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Abjuration, Invocation/ Evocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : The caster recites a sacred passage/ declaration. Thus invoking
      his god's blessing upon himself and his allies, while sowing 
      confusion and weakness on his enemies. Everyone within 60 feet of
      the caster is affected.
            1. Friendly creatures gain +2 bonus to THAC0.
            2. Friendly creatures gain +2 bonus to all saving throws.
            3. Hostile creatures receive -2 penalty to THAC0.
            4. Hostile creatures receive -2 penalty to all saving 
                  throws.
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7, Paladins at level 15
Comments : A good combat-support/defensive spell. When using this spell,
      always cast it after the start of a battle, where enemies are
      within range. The effects of this spell is cumulative with other
      combat-support spells, and as such is best used with them. This
      spell can be cast without dispelling an existing SANCTUARY (1C)
      spell on the caster. See also PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10' RADIUS
      (4C), EMOTION HOPE (4M), EMOTION COURAGE (4M), DEFENSIVE HARMONY
      (4C), GREATER MALISON (4M), HASTE (3M), SLOW (3M), PRAYER (3C),
      BLESS (1CD), CURSE (1CD).


L4-31 : REMOVE CURSE 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : 1 party member wearing cursed items 
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Cursed items the target is wearing is unequipped and placed in 
      target's inventory. 
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Some cursed items can only be removed by a caster of 
      sufficient level
Obtain from :
      1. Chest, west, top floor of Solonor Tower (priest), Hand of the
      Seldarine (Severed Hand)
Comments : Cursed items cannot be removed when worn, the only way to 
      remove it is with this spell (or with the "QUICK RELOAD" spell). A
      curse cannot be removed from an item. Cursed items usually have 
      properties that greatly degrades the wearer's ability. Some cursed
      items though are also powerful, and might be worth wearing and you
      need this spell when you want them removed. This is the Mage's
      version of Remove Curse, it can be cast faster than the Cleric's
      level 3 equivalent. See also IDENTIFY (1M).


L4-32 : SHADOW MONSTERS
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Shapes material from the Demiplane of Shadow into semi-real 
      illusions of one or more monsters under your control. These
      shadowy creatures have only 20% of the hitpoints of their
      real-world counterparts although their attacks do full damage. The
      spell summons... 
            i.   [1 to casterlevel] level Shadow, of a random monster
            ii.  [1 to [casterlevel - levels of first creature]] level
                  Shadow, of a random monster 
            iii. [1 to [casterlevel - sum of the levels of the previous
                 creatures] level Shadow, of a random monster
            ... and so on until no levels are left.      
      (In short, it summons 1 to 6 Shadow Monsters, the sum of their
      levels is equal or less than the caster's level. The form of the
      Shadow Monsters are mostly Trolls (killable without fire/acid),
      Lizard Men and/or Goblins.)
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 4
Comments : A version of the MONSTER SUMMONING series of spells that
      improves with level. Because this spell falls under ILLUSIONS not
      CONJURATION, this can be cast by Mage specialists DIVINERS and
      INVOKERS. This spell can be cast relatively fast and the creatures
      it summons can attack well, although they are weak. This spell is
      best used to attack undefended spellcasters or missile-users from
      behind. See also MONSTER SUMMONING II (4M), GIANT INSECT (4D),
      ANIMAL SUMMONING I (4D).


L4-33 : SHOUT 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Invocation
Target : Angle
Range : 30 feet
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Gives the caster tremendous vocal powers, enabling him to emit
      an ear-splitting roar in a cone-shape area 30 feet long, 10 feet
      wide at its farthest point (long, very narrow cone, almost 
      projectile-like).
            1. Creatures in the affected area suffer 4 to 24 magic
                  damage (average of 14) from the loud noise.
            2. Must save vs spells or be deafened (50% chance of casting
                  failure, unable to hear Bard songs) for 2 to 12 rounds
                  (average of 7). 
Duration : See effect
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A good disruptor spell. This spell is best used against
      spellcasters whether to disrupt or to degrade their ability to
      cast spells. Deafness works against all spellcasters not just
      Mages. See also MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M), BELTYN'S BURNING BLOOD
      (4M), MISCAST MAGIC (3C), SILENCE 15' RADIUS (2C). 


L4-34 : SMASHING WAVE
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Invocation
Target : Angle
Range : 40 feet
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons a wave of water that moves in the direction willed by
      the caster, striking all in its path with massive force. 
            1. Creatures caught in its path suffer 4 to 40 crushing
                  damage (average of 22).
            2. There is a 25% chance that creatures struck are stunned
                  (cannot move/ attack/ cast/ defend) for 2 rounds.
            3. 5% chance they get knocked unconcious (cannot move/
                   attack/ cast/ defend) for 2 rounds. 
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs breath weapon to take only half of damage, and to
      avoid getting stunned or knocked unconcious
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 7, Rangers at level 15
Comments : This spell does damage on a wide, line area. Although this
      spell has a long casting time, creatures must save vs breath,
      which seems to be the hardest to save against. The wave passes
      over a wide (relative to projectiles) area and should be able to
      hit groups of enemies easily if you line them up. This spell is 
      also used to hit mages protected by a MINOR GLOBE OF
      INVULNERABILITY (4M). See also SHOUT (4M), LANCE OF DISRUPTION
      (3M), AGANNAZAR'S SCORCHER (2M).


L4-35 : SPIRIT ARMOR 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : touch
Casting Time : .3 round 
Effect : Taps the target's life force to create a magical field of 
      force around target's body equal to the strength of a Full Plate
      Mail armor. While in effect, the target's AC is set to 1 and gains
      a +3 bonus to all saving throws against magic. When the spell
      expires, the external portion of the target's spirit is 
      temporarily lost doing 2 to 8 damage (average of 5) to the target.
Duration : 30 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Orricks's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2 and 4
Comments : For the most part, the best armor substitute. This spell is
      usually cast before the start of a hard battle. Mages, bards,
      thieves are the usual recipients of this spell, giving them the
      protection of a Full Plate Mail while still being able to use
      magic or thief skills. BARKSKIN's (2D) base AC bonus will
      eventually surpass this' at level 24. See also IMPROVED
      INVISIBILITY (4M), GHOST ARMOR (3M), PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10'
      RADIUS (4C), PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M).


L4-36 : STAR METAL CUDGEL
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Conjuration
Target : Caster 
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : The caster creates a meteoric iron magical club (melee weapon).
            1. This weapon has a base damage (crushing) of 1 to 6 
                  (average of 3.5) (being a club).
            2. Has a +2 bonus to hit and damage.
            3. Is considered a +4 weapon for determining what it can
                   hit.
            4. Does an additional 2 to 12 crushing damage (average of 7)
                  against unnatural creatures such as the undead, Golems
                  and extraplanar creatures.
Duration : 30 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druid at level 7, Rangers at level 15
Comments : A handy spell for Rangers, Fighter-Druids and Cleric-Rangers.
      Unlike MOONBLADE (3D), strength and proficiency bonuses apply to 
      this weapon. Obviously, this spell is best used against unnatural
      creatures. See also BEAST CLAW (2D), FLAME BLADE (2D), SHILLELAGH
      (1D).


L4-37 : STATIC CHARGE
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : Caster 
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Allows the caster to generate a static charge around any 
      creature close enough to the caster. Every 10 rounds, including
      the first round (round when cast), a random enemy within a
      certain distance suffers [[2 to 8] + [[1 to 8] x casterlevel]]
      electrical damage, save vs spells to take only half damage.

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 7 caster, 36.5 average damage per hit
            Level 10, 50 damage
            Level 15, 72.5 damage
            Level 20, 95 damage
            Level 25, 117.5 damage
            Level 30, 140 damage
  
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 7, Rangers at level 15
Comments : A very powerful aura-like spell, especially for Rangers. The
      effects of two or more Static Charge spells are cummulative. So if
      you cast 4 Static Charge spells, 4 times every 10 rounds for a
      very long time, a hostile creature not too far from the caster is
      gonna take alot of damage. This spell works best with an 
      INVISIBILITY (2M) spell on the caster, enabling him to approach
      and inflict damage on enemies while avoiding a retalitiation. You
      cannot save the game if one of the charge is setting off
      (especially if you casted alot) just press "Q" quickly until you
      find an opening. This spell is one of the most powerful damage 
      spell in the game, second only to CALL LIGHTNING (3D). Druids can
      shapeshift without cancelling this spell, the Wolf form is
      particularly convenient with the invisibility technique (for
      speed).


L4-38 : STONESKIN
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Caster 
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Makes the caster virtually immune to any cut, blow, projectile
      or the like. [[1 to 4] + integer of [casterlevel / 2]] successful
      physical attacks on the caster bounce off with no effect.

      Resilience progression :
            a. Level 7 caster, absorbs an average of 5.5 attacks  
            b. Level 8, 6.5 attacks
            c. Level 10, 7.5 attacks
            d. Level 12, 8.5 attacks 
            e. Level 14, 9.5 attacks
            f. Level 16, 10.5 attacks
            g. Level 18, 11.5 attacks
            h. Level 20, 12.5 attacks
            i. Level 22, 13.5 attacks
            j. Level 24, 14.5 attacks
            k. Level 26, 15.5 attacks
            l. Level 28, 16.5 attacks
            m. Level 30, 17.5 attacks

Duration : 900 rounds (16 hours), or until protection wears out
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Second floor of Corellon tower (war room), Hand of the 
            Seldarine (Severed Hand)
      2. Crate, south of fourth dungeon beneath the keep (the one with 
            Jackalweres), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : Dependable protection spell with a very long duration. This
      spell lasts for a very long time, and should therefore be cast
      right after resting. You cannot cast Stoneskin if another is still 
      active. This spell is cumulative with MIRROR IMAGE (2M): Mirror
      Image absorbs the attacks first, if any attack passes, then 
      Stoneskin will absorb it. This spell protect against crushing,
      piercing, slashing types of damage, this includes those caused by
      spells, such as SMASHING WAVE (4D) or SPIKE GROWTH (3D). See also
      MINOR GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M), OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE
      (4M), IMPROVED INVISIBILITY (4M), INVISIBILITY (2M), SHIELD (1M).


L4-39 : THORN SPRAY
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration
Target : Angle 
Range : 30 feet
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Enables the caster to cause a spray of barbs, spikes, thorns,
      and spines to spring forth from his hand, flying through a cone
      area 30 feet long, 60 feet wide at its widest (long wide cone, 
      almost 90 degrees). 
            a. Creatures within the affected area must save vs death or
                  suffer 2 to 20 piercing damage (average of 11). 
            b. If a save is made, they suffer 1 to 10 piercing damage
                  (average of 5.5) instead.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 7, Rangers at level 15
Comments : It's the Druid's fastest attack spell yet. This spell also
      affects a large area, making it a good disruptor spell (for the
      Druid). Unfortunately, it does so little damage, especially
      considering it's a level 4 spell. See also HOLY SMITE (3C).


L4-40 : UNFAILING ENDURANCE
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Restores the target's stamina, bringing back energy lost from a
      day and a half (2025 rounds) of exertion (cures fatigue). 
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicablee
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 7, Paladins at level 15
Comments : Cures Fatigue. Fatigued characters suffer -1 penalty to all
      rolls, and an additional -1 penalty every 225 rounds (4 hours)
      without rest (since getting fatigued). This spell can be used with
      HASTE (3M) (especially if you have few Warriors). Cast Haste on
      your Warriors only (separate then cast) (who are the ones who
      benefit the most from Haste) then cast this spell afterwards. 
      Resting (obviously) removes fatigue. Although, getting interrupted
      while trying to rest fatigued characters really racks up the
      penalties. Also in some maps, resting causes some monsters to
      respawn.


L4-41 : VITRIOLIC SPHERE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : Conjures a sphere of glowing emerald acid. The caster directs
      the sphere to the target then the sphere flies unerringly and
      explodes.
            1. Target must save vs spells or suffer [[1 to 4] x 
                  casterlevel] acid damage, up to a maximum of 12 to 48
                  at level 12. If the save is successful then the target
                  takes only half damage and acid damage stops.
 
                  Otherwise, each round after that, target must save vs
                  spells or suffer [1 to 4] x [[casterlevel] - [2 x 
                  rounds that passed]] acid damage, until target makes a
                  save or until the acid damage is 0. 

                  Effect of maximum damage (level 12) per round :
                        a. First round, average of 30 damage
                        b. Second round, 25
                        c. Third round,  20
                        d. Fourth round, 15
                        e. Fifth round,  10
                        f. Sixth round,   5

            2. Creatures within 5 feet of target (including the target)
                  suffer [1 to 4] x [integer of [casterlevel / 5]] acid
                  damage, save vs polymorph for none. 

                  Damage progression :
                        a. Level 7 caster, average of 2.5 damage
                        b. Level 10,  5
                        c. Level 15,  7.5
                        d. Level 20, 10
                        e. Level 25, 12.5
                        f. Level 30, 15

      (Maximum average damage of 90 over 6 rounds assuming all saves are
      unsucessful. Maximum average damage of 15 if both saves are 
      sucessful (first round).)

Duration : See effect
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : Do-you-feel-lucky spell. If you still want to use this spell, 
      make sure to lower the enemies saving throws first (GREATER
      MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C), CHANT (1C), CURSE
      (1CD)). See also BELTYN'S BURNING BLOOD (4M), MOLD TOUCH (3D),
      MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M).


L4-42 : WALL OF MOONLIGHT
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School :  Invocation
Target : Area
Range : Sighht of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Invokes a shimmering tapestry of blue-white force. The wall is
      5 feet wide, 20 feet long, it is intangible, requiring no physical
      anchor and can easily be passed through. 
            a. Evil creatures passing through the wall suffer 2 to 20
                  magic(?) damage (average of 11).
            b. Evil undead creatures suffer 5 to 50 magic(?) damage
                  (average of 27.5). 
      Any creature passing through the wall can only take damage from it
      once. You cannot cast another Wall of Moonlight if another is
      still active.
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 7, Rangers at level 15.
Comments : A small, weak, buggy area-effect spell. This spell doesn't do
      any damage to non-evil creatures. You might be surprised about
      just how hard it is to find evil creatures, especially evil 
      undead. See also HOLY SMITE (3C), DETECT EVIL (2M/1CD).





---
LEVEL 5 SPELLS


L5-01 : ANIMAL RAGE
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Enchantment
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : The target is filled with animal ferocity.
            1. The target's strength is set to 19 (+3 to hit, +7
                  damage).
            2. Gains +20 to his maximum life.
            3. Movement is increased by 20 percent.
            4. Gains +2 to all his saving throws.
            5. Loses the ability to cast spells (while in effect).
            5. The target automatically attacks in melee 
                  (uncontrollable) when enemies are within sight.
            6. Will go berserk and attack friendly units for 1 round 
                  after the battle.
Duration :  15 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 9, Rangers at level 22
Comments : One of the few ways to increase strength above 18. This spell
      is best used on summoned creatures such as those from CONJURE
      WATER ELEMENTAL (5M) or CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL (7D/5M), as they
      pretty much move on their own anyway. This spell works even better
      when used with BLOOD RAGE (4nonlawC); cast Animal Rage first then
      Blood Rage for your very own instrument of destruction. You can
      also cast this on well-armored characters with not-so-high
      strength such as Paladins or multi-class fighters. An EXALTATION
      (3C) spell will not prevent the target of this spell from
      berserking. Although this spell has a touch range and a long
      casting time, casting it on an enemy spellcaster is a sure way of
      taking out his spellcasting ability. See also STRENGTH (2M),
      CAT'S GRACE (2M), AID (2C). 

 
L5-02 : ANIMAL SUMMONING II ( ANIMAL SUMMONING 2 )
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster 
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : Summons 2(?) to 6 (average of 4) level 8 or below animals to
      aid you. The animals are under your control, mostly Cave Bears or
      Dire Wolves.
Duration : 50 rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 9, Rangers at level 22
Comments : This spell is best used to provide cannon fodder protection
      for spellcasters and other weak members. This spell lasts long 
      enough to be cast before a battle starts. The creatures this spell
      summons are generally tough enough to withstand attacks for some
      time, some of the bears are even as tough as elementals. They
      should be cast to block open paths to vulnerable characters. See
      also CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6D/5M), CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL 
      (7D/5M), CONJURE WATER ELEMENTAL (5M), SUMMON SHADOW (5M), 
      DEMI-SHADOW MONSTERS (5M).


L5-03 : ANIMATE DEAD 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Bodies of the dead become animated and follow simple verbal
      commands from the caster (doesn't actually need corpse). The spell
      summons... 
            i.   [1 to casterlevel] level Skeleton or Zombie
            ii.  [1 to [casterlevel - levels of first Skeleton or
                 Zombie] level Skeleton or Zombie
            iii. [1 to [casterlevel - sum of the levels of the previous
                 Skeletons and/or Zombies] level Skeleton or Zombie
            ... and so on until no levels are left.   
      (In short, it summons 1 to 6 Skeletons and/or Zombies, the sum of
      their levels is equal or less than the caster's level.) 
Duration : 450 rounds (8 hours)
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : 
      1. Table, north of second level, Hand of the Seldarine (Severed
            Hand)
Comments : An obsolete spell. This spell can be cast by Clerics as a 
      level 3 spell. Skeletons and Zombies last long but they are weak
      (by the time you get this). They are completely immune to 
      cold damage (yours), fear, charm, hold spells. Skeletons are
      generally armed with non-magical ranged or melee weapons, although
      some may have Arrows of Fire, Arrows +1 or High Quality Mace. See
      also CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6D/5M), CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL
      (7D/5M), CONJURE WATER ELEMENTAL (5M), ANIMAL SUMMONING II (5D),
      SUMMON SHADOW (5M), DEMI-SHADOW MONSTERS (5M).


L5-04 : CAUSE CRITICAL WOUNDS (Reverse of CURE CRITICAL WOUNDS)
Spell : Evil Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : The caster touches the target then casts this spell, causing 27
      magic damage.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to suffer only half damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9
Comments : A weak attack spell. This spell is hard to use because it has
      it has a long casting time and touch range. This spell also
      doesn't work on non-living creatures, including the undead. FLAME
      STRIKE (5C) is a good alternative to this spell; it does the same
      amount of damage and has the same casting time, but it has 
      sight-of-caster range and an area-effect. See also SLAY LIVING 
      (5nongoodC), POISON (4evilC), CAUSE SERIOUS WOUNDS (4nongoodC),
      CAUSE MODERATE WOUNDS (2nongoodC), CAUSE LIGHT WOUNDS (1nongoodC).


L5-05 : CHAMPION'S STRENGTH
Spell : Cleric, Paladins
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : The caster draws strength from his god, and lends it to the
      target. 
            1. The target's strength is set to [20 to 23] (average of
                  21.5 (21 strength; +4 to hit, +9 damage)). 
            2. This spell requires alot of concentration on the part of
                  the caster, hence losing the ability to cast spells
                  for the duration of this spell.
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 22
Comments : A powerful strength spell with a price. This spell is best
      used on Thieves, especially Fighter-Thieves to improve their
      backstab damage. This should be used with IMPROVED INVISIBILITY
      (4M), allowing the Thief to do major damage with repeated
      backstabs. See also ANIMAL RAGE (5D), BLOOD RAGE (4nonlawC), 
      STRENGTH OF ONE (3C), STRENGTH (2M). 


L5-06 : CHAOS
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Causes confusion to all hostile creatures within 30 feet of
      cast point, creating indecision and inability to take effective
      action. Affected creatures randomly...
            a. Attack nearest creature
            b. Stand still
            c. Walk aimlessly
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : 
      a. Level 4 and below creatures get no saving throw.
      b. Level 5 and above creatures can save vs spells with a -4
            penalty to avoid effect.
Obtain from : 
      1. A tomb in The Hall of Heroes, Dorn's Deep
Comments : A better CONFUSION (7C/4M) or RIGID THINKING (3C) spell. This
      spell is a powerful defensive spell that can drastically reduce
      the amount of physical damage your party is taking. It also stops
      enemy spellcasters from casting spells. Like Confusion (7C/4M),
      this spell doesn't work againts the undead. For maximum effect
      cast this after GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C)
      and/or CURSE (1CD). This spell makes enemies a little
      unpredictable, so take caution to keep vulnerable party members
      away from the front lines. See also SLOW (3M), HORROR (2M),
      EMOTION FEAR (4M).


L5-07 : CHAOTIC COMMANDS
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Gives the target immunity to magical commands such as
      suggestion, charm, domination, command, sleep, confusion spells. 
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 22
Comments : Protection spell with a very long duration. This spell is
      mainly used to prevent your Warriors from being confused by 
      Umber Hulks and other creatures. This spell will not cure a
      character that's already confused. See also MAGIC RESISTANCE (5C),
      PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10' RADIUS (4C), EXALTATION (3C).


L5-08 : CLOUDKILL
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Generates a billowing cloud of ghastly yellowish green, toxic
      vapors that covers everything within 15 feet of cast point.
      Creatures within the area of effect suffer its effects, with low
      level creatures suffering more.
            a. Level 3, 2 and 1 creatures are automatically killed. 
            b. Level 4 creatures with less than 15 constitution are 
                  automatically killed.
            c. Level 4 creatures with 15 or more constitution must save
                  vs death every round with -4 penalty or be killed.
            d. Level 5 and 6 creatures must save vs death every round
                  with -4 penalty or be killed.
            e. Level 7 and above creatures suffer 1 to 10 poison damage
                  (average of 5.5) every round; with a maximum average
                  damage of 55 over 10 rounds, per victim. 
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :  
      1. Second floor of Corellon tower (war room), Hand of the
            Seldarine (Severed Hand)
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A powerful area-effect spell. The effects of two or more
      Cloudkill are cmmulative. This spell works even better with WEB
      (2M), STINKING CLOUD (2M), ENTANGLE (1D) and/or GREASE (1M).
      Another way of using this spell is to lure enemies with a Warrior,
      cast OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M) on him, then cast a number of
      this spell over them. You can also simply cast this spell near
      enemies to inflict damage on them from beyond visual range (to
      avoid retaliation - doesn't work on some). This spell has a long
      duration and therefore should not be used in easy battles (you
      can't save while active). Undead creatures are immune to poison
      damage (since they're already dead), so are Golems and other
      non-living creatures. Level 9+ Druids are also immune to poison.
      See also SPIKE STONES (5D), SPIKE GROWTH (3D), SKULL TRAP (3M),
      GLYPH OF WARDING (3C).


L5-09 : CONE OF COLD
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Angle
Range : 35 feet
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Releases a cone-shaped blast of extreme cold from the caster. 
      The cone is 35 feet long, 20 feet wide at its farthest point
      (long, medium arc ('bout 45 degrees)). Creatures caught within
      cone's area of effect suffer [[2 to 5] x casterlevel] cold damage.

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 9 caster, 31.5 average damage
            Level 10, 35 damage
            Level 15, 52.5 damage
            Level 20, 70 damage
            Level 25, 87.5 damage
            Level 30, 105 damage

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to take only half of damage
Obtain from :
      1. Table in Sehriya's room, third level, Hand of the Seldarine
            (Severed Hand)
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southeast of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : High damage cone spell. This spell does alot of damage but
      its cone area means you have to have a clear shot, exposing the
      caster. This spell is usually cast by stepping to the sides (of 
      the party) and casting it there. I usually use this spell with 
      either stopping spells (WEB (2M)/ STINKING CLOUD (2M)/ ENTANGLE 
      (1D)), or with an OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M) on my front
      Fighter. Ofcourse it would be alot easier to use if your front 
      Warrior has good Cold Resistance (acceptable friendly fire). This
      spell is best learned by Bards, who level up alot faster than
      mages. See also SKULL TRAP (3M), GLYPH OF WARDING (3C).


L5-10 : CONTACT OTHER PLANE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Divination
Target : None
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Contacts powers from other planes of existence in order to 
      receive advice and information; a Planar Spirit appears which can
      be ask various questions, it will only answer 1 question. The 
      questions that can be ask depends on the general area the spell 
      was cast (Kuldahar/ Severed Hand/ Dorn's Deep/ etc).          
Duration : Planar Spirit remains until a question is asked
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : 
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 2
      2. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : An RPG spell, used to find out more on how to solve certain
      quests, where powerful items are located and other stuff (...like
      finding the name of a certain demon). Planar Spirits are
      unkillable, though enemies will not attack them. See also KNOW
      ALIGNMENT (2CD), DETECT EVIL (2M/1CD).


L5-11 : CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons an elemental from the Elemental Plane of Earth, and
      binds it to the caster's will. 

      Earth Elemental statistics :
            Does about 17 crushing damage per attack
            Has about 60 hitpoints

Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Buy from Bandoth, in house(?), northeast of the first cave in
            Dorn's Deep
Comments : Elementals are immune to the effects of WEB (2M) and ENTANGLE
      (1D), allowing them to freely move in them and attack helpless
      enemies. Elementals are tough summoned creatures, they can be used
      effectively as cannon fodders and as fighter-support. The spell
      has a long duration and should be cast before a battle starts,
      where the Elementals might benefit from any pre-battle support
      spells. See also CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6D/5M), CONJURE WATER
      ELEMENTAL (7D/5M), ANIMAL SUMMONING II (5D), SUMMON SHADOW (5M),
      DEMI-SHADOW MONSTERS (5D), ANIMATE DEAD (5M/3C), MONSTER SUMMONING
      III (5M).


L5-12 : CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons an elemental from the Elemental Plane of Fire, and
      binds it to the caster's will.

      Fire Elemental statistics :
            Does about 4 crushing damage
            Target must save vs breath weapon per hit or suffer about 2
                  fire damage
            Has about 60 hitpoints
            Immune to fire damage

Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Buy from Bandoth, in house(?), northeast of the first cave in
            Dorn's Deep
Comments : Elementals are immune to the effects of WEB (2M) and ENTANGLE
      (1D), allowing them to freely move in them and attack helpless
      enemies. Elementals are tough summoned creatures, they can be used
      effectively as cannon fodders and as fighter-support. The spell
      has a long duration and should be cast before a battle starts,
      where the Elementals might benefit from any pre-battle support
      spells. Fire Elementals are the best cannon fodders among the 
      summoned elementals because of their fire immunity. They can also
      be used to kill Trolls because they do fire damage. See also
      CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL (6D/5M), CONJURE WATER ELEMENTAL (7D/5M),
      ANIMAL SUMMONING II (5D), SUMMON SHADOW (5M), DEMI-SHADOW MONSTERS
      (5D), ANIMATE DEAD (5M/3C), MONSTER SUMMONING III (5M).


L5-13 : CONJURE WATER ELEMENTAL
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons an elemental from the Elemental Plane of Water, and
      binds it to the caster's will.

      Water Elemental statistics :
            Does about 19 crushing damage per attack
            Has about 60 hitpoints
            Freuqently fails saving throws vs spells

Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Buy from Bandoth, in house(?), northeast of the first cave in
            Dorn's Deep
Comments : Elementals are immune to the effects of WEB (2M) and ENTANGLE
      (1D), allowing them to freely move in them and attack helpless
      enemies. Elementals are tough summoned creatures, they can be used
      effectively as cannon fodders and as fighter-support. The spell
      has a long duration and should be cast before a battle starts,
      where the Elementals might benefit from any pre-battle support
      spells. Water Elementals do the most damage among the summoned 
      elementals. See also CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6D/5M), CONJURE EARTH
      ELEMENTAL (5M), ANIMAL SUMMONING II (5D), SUMMON SHADOW (5M),
      DEMI-SHADOW MONSTERS (5D), ANIMATE DEAD (5M/3C), MONSTER SUMMONING
      III (5M).


L5-14 : CURE CRITICAL WOUNDS
Spell : Non-evil Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : The caster lays his hand on the target then casts this spell,
      healing 27 points of damage. 
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 9, Paladins and 
      Rangers at level 22
Comments : Healing spell. This spell cannot be cast by evil characters.
      It's generally best to heal only characters with more damage than
      this spell heals. Front characters are usually the primary targets
      of this spell. See also CURE SERIOUS WOUNDS (4CD), CURE MODERATE
      WOUNDS (2CD), GOODBERRY (2D), CURE LIGHT WOUNDS (1CD), NEUTRALIZE
      POISON (4C), CURE DISEASE (3C).


L5-15 : DEMI-SHADOW MONSTERS 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Shapes material from the Demiplane of Shadow into semi-real 
      illusions of one or more monsters under your control. These
      shadowy creatures have only 40 percent of the hitpoints of their
      real-world counterparts although their attacks do full damage. The
      spell summons... 
            i.   [1 to casterlevel] level Shadow, of a random monster
            ii.  [1 to [casterlevel - levels of first creature]] level
                  Shadow, of a random monster 
            iii. [1 to [casterlevel - sum of the levels of the previous
                 creatures] level Shadow, of a random monster
            ... and so on until no levels are left.   
      (In short, it summons 1 to 6 Demi-shadow Monsters, the sum of their
      levels is equal or less than the caster's level. The form of the
      Demi-shadow Monsters are Lizard Men and/or Goblin Elites.) 
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 4
      2. Crate, southeast of the fourth dungeon below the keep (the one
            with Jackalweres), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : A version of the MONSTER SUMMONING series of spells that
      improves with level. Because this spell falls under ILLUSIONS not
      CONJURATION, this can be cast by Mage specialists DIVINERS and
      INVOKERS. This spell is best used to attack undefended
      spellcasters or missile-users from behind. See also CONJURE EARTH
      ELEMENTAL (7D/5M), CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6D/5M), CONJURE WATER
      ELEMENTAL (5M), ANIMAL SUMMONING II (5D), SUMMON SHADOW (5M),
      ANIMATE DEAD (5M/3C), MONSTER SUMMONING III (5M).


L5-16 : DOMINATION
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The caster dominates the target's mind and is able to control
      his actions through a telepatic link.
Duration : 675 rounds (or 12 hours), or until target is attacked by
      player's forces
Avoidance : Save vs spells with -2 penalty to avoid effect
Obtain from :
      1. A tomb in The Hall of Heroes, Dorn's Deep
      2. Tomb on a wall, west-center of the first dungeon, Trials of the
            Luremaster
Comments : The best "charm" spell. This spell has a very long duration
      and is not restricted to people. It's usually best to send
      dominated creatures to go fight enemies to their deaths, keep them
      away from vulnerable party members. Dominated creatures can only
      attack using their default weapons, you cannot order them to cast
      spells, use thieving spells, etc. Dominated creatures are
      considered friendy units and spells like BLESS (1CD) will affect
      them. The spell is considered a hostile spell, friendly creatures
      you dominated will turn hostile afterwards. You can lower enemy
      saving throws with GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER
      (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD). Creatures affected by CHAOTIC COMMANDS
      (5C), PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10' RADIUS (4C) or PROTECTION FROM EVIL
      (1CD/1M) are immune to the effects of this spell. The undead are
      also immune to this spell's effects. This spell is the same as a
      Cleric's MENTAL DOMINATION (4C) spell, except it lasts far longer.
      See also DIRE CHARM (3M), CHARM PERSON OR MAMMAL (2D), CHARM
      PERSON (1M).


L5-17 : FLAME STRIKE
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : A vertical column of fire roars downward towards the area. All
      creatures within 5 feet of cast point suffer 6 to 48 (average of 
      27) fire damage, save vs spells for half damage. 
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 22
Comments : The only fire-damage spell Clerics have. It's also the only
      level 5 ranged-attack Cleric spell. This spell does weak damage,
      and has a small area of effect, but it's the only one of its kind
      your Cleric has. Use it as a weak fire spell in addition to your
      Mage and Druid fire spells againts fire-vulnerable creatures or to
      kill Trolls. See also GLYPH OF WARDING (3C), MAGICAL STONE (1C).


L5-18 : FEEBLEMIND
Spell : Mages, Bards 
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Turns the target into a gibbering idiot.
            1. Target's intelligence is set to 3.
            2. Target is unresponsive. He doesn't move/attack/cast, 
                  although he will still defend.
Duration : 450 rounds (or 8 hours)
Avoidance : Save vs spells with -2 penalty to escape effects
Obtain from : 
      1. Buy from Bandoth, in house(?), northeast of the first cave in
            Dorn's Deep
Comments : An instant kill spell. Creatures affected by this spell
      almost as good as dead. Unlike hold spells, this spell works on
      undead creatures. You can lower enemy saving throws with GREATER
      MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD).
      Since using this spell requires/encourages you to lower enemy
      saving throws, you should use it with lots of other similarly
      powerful spells like HOLD MONSTER (5M), SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC),
      DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL DOMINATION (4C). If the target creature
      has high magic resistance, you can use LOWER RESISTANCE (5M) to
      lower it. If you have to choose between your Bard and Mage, give
      this spell to your Mage (who can cast more). Creatures affected by
      EXALTATION (3C) are immune to this spell.


L5-19 : GREATER COMMAND (GREATER COMMAND WORD "DIE" (?))
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : The caster magically commands all hostile creatures within 20
      feet of cast point to "die". Affected creatures obey and act as
      if dead, they do not move/attack/cast/defend unless they are
      attacked (which breaks the spell). 
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 22
Comments : Works just like SLEEP (1M), except without the level limit.      
      When using this spell, attack affected creatures one at a time, so
      others don't wake up. This spell is a powerful defensive spell,
      especially at high levels where the duration is very long. For 
      maximum effect, cast this after GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION 
      (4C), PRAYER (3C), and/or CURSE (1CD). See also CHAOS (5M),
      CONFUSION (7C/4M), EMOTION HOPELESSNESS (4M), SLOW (3M), HORROR
      (2M), COLOR SPRAY (1M). 


L5-20 : HOLD MONSTER
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Holds 1 to 4 creatures (average of 2.5) of any type within 20
      feet of cast point. Held creatures cannot move/attack/cast/defend.
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effects
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 4
Comments : The best of the HOLD spells. A powerful disabling spell, 
      practically making its victims as good as dead. You can lower
      enemy saving throws with GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C),
      PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD). Since using this spell requires/
      encourages you to lower enemy saving throws, you should use it
      with lots of other similarly powerful spells like FEEBLEMIND (5M),
      SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC), DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL DOMINATION
      (4C). If the target creature has high magic resistance, you can
      use LOWER RESISTANCE (5M) to lower it. If you have to choose
      between your Bard and your Mage, give this spell to your Bard (and
      give Feeblemind to your Mage). This spell doesn't work on the
      undead. Creatures affected by EXALTATION (3C) are immune to this
      spell. See also EMOTION HOPELESSNESS (4M), HOLD PERSON (3M/2C),
      HOLD ANIMAL (3D), GHOUL TOUCH (2M), CHROMATIC ORB (1M). 


L5-21 : INSECT PLAGUE 
Spell : Druids, Rangers 
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons a swarm of creeping, hopping and flying insects 
      everywhere within 25 feet of cast point.
            1. Creatures within the affected area cannot cast any
                  spells,
            2. Suffer 1 piercing damage every round due to the bites and
                  stings of the insects.
            3. Level 5, 4 or 3 creatures must must make a morale check
                  or panic (cannot attack/cast spells, runs around/
                  stands still randomly).
            4. Creatures at level 2 or 1, will immediately panic (cannot
                  attack/cast spells, runs around/stands still
                  randomly).
Duration : 15 rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 9, Rangers at level 22
Comments : A better SILENCE 15' RADIUS spell. This spell is mainly used
      against groups of spellcasters. This spell doesn't do alot of
      damage, enabling your Fighters to freely engage enemies within the
      area of effect without taking too much damage. The undead are 
      immune to this spell (apparently insects bite them all the time
      anyway so they don't mind it one bit). See also SPIKE STONES (5D),
      CLOUDKILL (5M), CLOUD OF PESTILENCE (4evilC), SPIKE STONES (3D),
      HORROR (2M).


L5-22 : LOWER RESISTANCE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Lowers the Magic Resistance of the target by [30 + 
      casterlevel]. This spell can be resisted by magic resistance, but
      only at half value. 
Duration : 20 rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from :
      1. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A set-up spell. Used before other spells when faced with 
      creatures with very high magic resistance, mostly bosses. This
      spell is best learned by Bards who level up alot faster than
      Mages. See also GREATER MALISON (4M), MAGIC RESISTANCE (5C).


L5-23 : MAGIC RESISTANCE
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Increases the target's Magic Resistance by [[casterlevel x 2],
      maximum of 40].  
Duration : [casterlevel + 3] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 22
Comments : An unassuming but very powerful spell. The effects of 2 or
      more Magic Resistance spells are cummulative, giving the target up
      to 100 magic resistance, each spell adding a maximum of 40 (as
      stated above). The most important use of this spell is to prevent
      DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M) from working on a target, in particular,
      Thieves (especially Fighter-Thieves). Raise the Thief's magic
      resistance to 100, cast CHAMPION'S STRENGTH (5C) on him or let the
      Thief drink a strength-enhancing potion, then cast IMPROVED
      INVISIBILITY (4M) on him. This combination allows the thief to do
      repeated backstabs for murderous damage while resisting Dispel
      Magic effects (most hard battles involve someone with a Dispel
      Magic ability). Another way to use this is to cast it on your
      best Warrior (or Warriors), along with lots of combat-support and
      protective spells; this is useful againts powerful spellcasters or
      enemies with powerful magical abilities. Note that a creature with
      100 magic resistance can still fail to resist a hostile magical
      effect, although the chance is slim. I don't know why this is so,
      but I would guess that the chance to resist magic has a cap. Also,
      the damage of persistent area-effect spells like DEATH FOG (6M) or
      SPIKE STONES (5D) cannot be resisted. Do not cast this spell on
      Mages or Bards to protect them from Dispel Magic, let them cast
      MINOR GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M) or GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY
      (6M) instead. See also CHAOTIC COMMANDS (5C), OTILUKE'S RESILIENT
      SPHERE (5M), IMPROVED INVISIBILITY (4M), FREE ACTION (4C),
      PROTECTION FROM LIGHTNING (4CD), PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10' RADIUS,
      PROTECTION FROM NORMAL MISSILES (3M), PROTECTION FROM FIRE (3CD),
      RESIST FEAR (2M), RESIST FIRE/RESIST COLD (2C), PROTECTION FROM
      PETRIFICATION (2M), PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M), REMOVE FEAR
      (1CD).


L5-24 : MONSTER SUMMONING III ( MONSTER SUMMONING 3 )
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster (slightly less)
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Summons 1 to 4 (average of 2.5) 3rd level monsters. Mostly
      Lizard Men (brown), Ghouls, Neo Orog Avengers, Huge Spiders or
      Boring Beetles.
Duration : [casterlevel + 4] rounds
Avoidance : Maximum 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : 
      1. A tomb in The Hall of Heroes, Dorn's Deep
Comments : This spell can be cast relatively fast although the monsters
      it summons are pretty weak. This spell is best used to attack
      undefended spellcasters or missile-users from behind. See also
      DEMI-SHADOW MONSTERS (5M), ANIMATE DEAD (5M/3C), ANIMAL SUMMONING
      II (5D), CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL (7D/5M), CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL
      (6D/5M), CONJURE WATER ELEMENTAL (5M). 


L5-25 : RAISE DEAD
Spell : Non-evil Clerics, Paladins
School : Necromancy
Target : Portrait
Range : Not applicable 
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Raises a dead party member from death, the character has only
      1 hitpoint and is carrying no equipment (all equipment is dropped
      upon death).
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Won't work on eleven characters
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 22
Comments : Important spell, but doesn't work on elves. This spell is
      important in hard battles. Although, players usually don't allow
      any character to be killed at all (reloading if neccessary).
      Still, if you're not a perfectionist, there are times where you
      might win a hard battle with casualties and don't want to play it
      over again (maybe because there's no near saved game), and you
      might want this spell for convenience's sake. In any event, it's
      usually more convenient to have scrolls of Raise Dead instead of
      memorizing this spell, because you're never really sure when
      you'll need it, and how many. Scrolls of Raise Dead can be bought
      from temples.


L5-26 : RIGHTEOUS WRATH OF THE FAITHFUL
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : Bestows a form of divine madness to all friendly creatures
      within 30 feet of cast point.
            1a. Friendly creatures with the same (exact) alignment as
                  the caster (including the caster) gain an extra attack
                  per round, +2 bonus to THAC0, +2 bonus to physical
                  damage dealt, +2 bonus to all saving throws, and an
                  additional 1 to 8 (average of 4.5) maximum hitpoints
                  (and healed by the same amount).
            1b. Other creatures gain +1 bonus to THAC0, +1 bonus to all
                  saving throws, and an additional 1 to 8 (average of
                  4.5) maximum hitpoints (and healed by the same
                  amount).
            2. All affected creatures suffer fatigue (-1 penalty to all
                  rolls, additional -1 penalty every 225 rounds (4
                  hours) without rest) after the spell's duration.
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 20
Comments : Powerful spell under the right circumstance. This spell is
      best used when most of your characters have the same alignment as
      the caster (duh). This spell works best with HASTE (3M) causing
      the attack rate bonus of this spell to double, also both of the
      spells cause fatigue afterwards. Note that everyone affected by
      this spell suffers fatigue, not just those with the same alignment
      as the caster. Unlike RECITATION (4C) or PRAYER (3C), this spell
      can be "aimed", giving you the choice of casting it only at
      specific members (separate then cast). See also CHANT (1C), BLESS
      (1CD).


L5-27 : SHIELD OF LATHANDER 
Spell : Non-evil Clerics, Paladins
School : Conjuration
Target : 1 non-evil creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : Grants the target immunity to all damage.
Duration : 2 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 22
Comments : A powerful yet weak spell. This spell can be used in 
      succession to give a front character invulnerability, this can
      only be done ofcourse, if the caster is of very high levels. 
      Lathander (Neutral Good) is the god of spring, dawn, birth, 
      youth, vitality, self-perfection and athletes. He is also known as
      the Morning Lord, his followers are called as Dawnbringers. Their
      temples are built facing east (sunrise), evil characters cannot be
      clerics of Lathander. See also OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M), 
      IMPROVED INVISIBILITY (4M), INVISIBILITY (2M). 


L5-28 : SHROUD OF FLAME
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Invocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Causes the target to burst in to flames. Every round for
      [integer of [casterlevel / 2]] rounds, the target burns suffering
      2 to 12 fire damage (average of 7). Also gouts of flame erupt from
      the target and creatures within 10 feet of the target suffer 1 to
      4 (average of 2.5) fire damage every round, they must also save vs
      spells (every round) or be affected by a full-strength Shroud of
      Flame as well.

      Duration/damage progression :
            a. Level 9 caster, shroud lasts for 4 rounds (average damage
                  of 28 to primary target)
            b. Level 10, 5 rounds (35 damage)
            c. Level 12, 6 rounds (42 damage)
            d. Level 14, 7 rounds (49 damage)
            e. Level 16, 8 rounds (56 damage)
            f. Level 18, 9 rounds (63 damage)
            g. Level 20, 10 rounds (70 damage)
            h. Level 22, 11 rounds (77 damage)
            i. Level 24, 12 rounds (84 damage)
            j. Level 26, 13 rounds (91 damage)
            k. Level 28, 14 rounds (98 damage)
            l. Level 30, 15 rounds (105 damage) 

Duration : See effect
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effects
Obtain from :
      1. Orrick's Study, Kuldahar, Chapter 4
Comments : A funny, powerful, but a-little-hard-to-use spell. Cast this
      on summoned creatures such as animals from the ANIMAL SUMMONING
      series of spells, wait until they infect each other, then send
      them (controlled by a stealthed Thief/invisible character) to
      attack your enemies and infect them too. This technique works best
      with MOLD TOUCH (3D), and against multiple opponents (the more,
      the better). This spells works on Fire Elementals too. See also
      MELF'S ACID ARROW, BELTYN'S BURNING BLOOD (4M).


L5-29 : SLAY LIVING (Reverse of RAISE DEAD)
Spell : Non-good Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : The caster touches the target then casts this spell, causing
      the target to be instantly killed.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs death to suffer 3 to 17 (average of 10) magic damage
      instead.
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9
Comments : An instant kill spell. This spell has a long casting time so
      use it only if the caster is well-armored. You can lower enemy
      saving throws with GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER
      (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD). Since using this spell requires/
      encourages you to lower enemy saving throws, you should use it
      with lots of other similarly powerful spells like FEEBLEMIND (5M),
      HOLD MONSTER (5M), DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL DOMINATION (4C). If
      the target creature has high magic resistance, you can use LOWER
      RESISTANCE (5M) to lower it. This spell doesn't work on non-living
      creatures, including the undead.


L5-30 : SPIKE STONES
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Alteration/ Enchantment
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Causes the terrain within 15 feet of the cast point to be 
      warped into spiked projections that naturally blends in the
      background. 
            1. Creatures within the area of effect suffer 2 to 8 piecing
                  damage (average of 5) every round; with a maximum 
                  average damage of 60 over 12 rounds, per victim.
            2. Must save vs spells every round or have their movement
                  rate slowed by 30 percent for 1 round.
Duration : 12 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 9, Rangers at level 22
Comments : A powerful area-effect spell. The effects of 2 or more Spike
      Stones spells are cummulative. This spell works even better with
      WEB (2M), STINKING CLOUD (2M), ENTANGLE (1D) and/or GREASE (1M).
      Another way of using this spell is to lure enemies a Warrior, cast
      OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M) on him, then cast a number of this
      spell over them. You can also simply cast this spell near enemies
      to inflict damage on them from beyond visual range (to avoid
      retaliation - doesn't work on some). This spell has a long
      duration and therefore should not be used in easy battles (you
      can't save while active). Creatures affected with FREE ACTION (4C)
      are unaffected by the spell's slowing effect, although they still
      take full damage from the spell. See also CLOUDKILL (5M), SPIKE
      GROWTH (3D), SKULL TRAP (3M), GLYPH OF WARDING (3C).


L5-31 : SUMMON SHADOW
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning, Necromancy
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Summons 3 Shadows that obey the caster's orders. 

      Shadow statistics:
            Does about 5 piercing damage per attack
            Victim save vs death per Shadow's sucessful attack or suffer
                  a cummulative -1(?) to strength (form of disease)                  
            They have about 25 hitpoints
            They seem to suffer from their own disease infecting
                  ability too (bug?)
             
Duration : [casterlevel + 1] rounds, or until creatures summoned are
      killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Buy from Bandoth, in house(?), northeast of the first cave in
            Dorn's Deep
      2. Crate, southeast of the fourth dungeon below the keep (the one
            with Jackalweres), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : A weak summon spell. Shadows are very weak, so is their
      attack. 


L5-32 : SUNFIRE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Invocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : The caster gestures with his hand, then flame erupts everywhere
      within 30 feet of the him (with the exception of where he is 
      standing). All creatures in the affected areas suffers 
      [[[1 to 6] x casterlevel], casterlevel set to 15 if greater] fire
      damage, save vs spells for half damage. 

      Damage progression :
            Level 9 caster, 31.5 average damage
            Level 10, 35 damage
            Level 11, 38.5 damage
            Level 12, 42 damage
            Level 13, 45.5 damage
            Level 14, 49 damage
            Level 15, 52.5 damage

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : An excuse to memorize lots of protection spells. This spell
      does damage on a very large area, one of the largest possible.
      This spell is best used againts multiple enemies. The caster
      should cast protections spells like STONESKIN (4M), MIRROR IMAGE
      (2M), SHIELD (1M) (and/or other AC improving spells) then move
      towards a large group of enemies, wait until he's surrounded
      (don't wait TOO long) then cast a number of this spell. If the
      caster runs out of this spell before all the enemies are killed,
      he should cast INVISIBILITY (2M) or OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE
      (4M) on himself, and have the rest of the party finish off what's
      left. Cleric-Mages/Fighter-Cleric-Mages casting this spell will
      break any existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on them. See also UNDEAD
      WARD (5C), STATIC CHARGE (4D), CIRCLE OF BONES (3nongoodC).


L5-33 : UNDEAD WARD
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Necromancy
Target : Caster
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Enables the caster to turn (rebuke) any undead that enters a
      20-foot-radius area where the caster casted the spell. The ward
      can only attempt to turn each undead victim only once. The higher
      the level of the caster, the more effective the ward is.
Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 9, Paladins at level 22
Comments : A defensive spell againts undead melee enemies. This spell is
      mainly used to prevent undead melee enemies from closing in on
      your vulnerable characters. This spell can be cast plenty of
      times, each ward acts independently. This spell can be cast
      without dispelling an existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on the caster.
      See also WALL OF MOONLIGHT (4D).





---
LEVEL 6 SPELLS


L6-01 : ANIMAL SUMMONING III ( ANIMAL SUMMONING 3 )
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .9 round
Effect : Summons 2(?) to 6 (average of 4) level 16 or below animals to
      aid you. The animals are under your control, mostly Polar Bears or
      Winter Wolves.
Duration : 50 rounds
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 11, Rangers at level 29
Comments : This spell is best used to provide cannon fodder protection
      for spellcasters and other weak members. This spell lasts long 
      enough to be cast before a battle starts. The creatures this spell
      summons are generally tough enough to withstand attacks for some
      time, some of the bears are even tougher than elementals. They
      should be cast to block open paths to vulnerable characters. See
      also CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6D/5M), INVISIBLE STALKER (6M),
      SHADES (6M), MONSTER SUMMONING IV (6M).


L6-02 : ANTIMAGIC SHELL
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : An invisible barrier surrounds the caster, moving with him,
      dispelling all magical effects on him, and making him completely
      immune all magical effects (with the exception of Bard songs). The
      caster also loses the ability to cast spells for the duration of
      this spell.     
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. A tomb in The Hall of Heroes, Dorn's Deep
Comments : A spell more trouble than its worth. This spell prevents all
      magical effect from working on the caster for a long, long time,
      including protection/healing spells, even healing potions, and it
      can't be dispelled. This spell should only be cast by tough
      Fighter-Mages, Fighter-Cleric-Mages, Fighter-Mage-Thieves,
      Cleric-Mages, or Bards (who can wear good armor) as an ultimate
      form of defense againts magic. If you have a Bard, he should sing
      WAR CHANT OF SITH, as it is the only form of magical healing for
      the caster of this spell. See also GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (6M),
      MAGIC RESISTANCE (5C), OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M), IMPROVED
      INVISIBILITY (4M), MINOR GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M), MIRROR
      IMAGE (2M), INVISIBILITY (2M).


L6-03 : BLADE BARRIER
Spell : Clerics, Paladins
School : Evocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .9 round
Effect : Conjures forth a wall of circling, razor-sharp blades that
      whirl and flash around the caster. Any creature within 3 feet of
      the caster suffers 8 to 64 slashing damage every round (average
      damage of 72 over 2 rounds, per victim), save vs spells for half
      damage. 
Duration : 2 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 11, Paladins at level 29
Comments : A better CIRCLE OF BONES (3nongoodC) spell. This spell can be
      cast without dispelling an existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on the
      caster. This spell can be used to kill specific enemies (such as
      spellcasters) while remaining unseen. The effects of 2 or more
      Blade Barrier spells are cummulative, so don't wait for the first
      one to finish before casting the next. To maximize effect,
      memorize this spell en masse, along with Circle of Bones. See also
      UNDEAD WARD (5C), SUNFIRE (5M), STATIC CHARGE (4D), CLOAK OF FEAR
      (4C).


L6-04 : CHAIN LIGHTNING
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Releases a burst of electrical energy to strike the target,
      inflicting [[casterlevel x [1 to 6]], casterlevel set to 12 if
      greater] electrical damage. As soon as the target is hit, the
      electricity jumps to the nearest creature (friend or foe) within
      caster's sight, doing [[casterlevel - number of jumps] x [1 to 6]]
      electrical damage. It will jump over and over again (never hitting
      the same target twice) until the next damage is 0 or until no
      other target is available. Each jump has a certain range limit, it
      won't jump to a target too far away from it's last victim.

      Damage List at Level 12 (and beyond) :
            First target, average of 42 damage
            Second, 38.5 damage
            Third, 35 damage
            Fourth, 31.5 damage
            Fifth 28 damage
            Sixth, 24.5 dmage
            Seventh, 21 damage
            Eighth, 17.5 damage
            Nineth, 14 damage
            Tenth, 10.5 damage
            Eleventh, 7 damage
            Twelfth, 3.5 damage

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to suffer only half damage
Obtain from :
      1. Closet in Kontik's lair, Frost Giant cave, Wyrm's Tooth 
Comments :


L6-05 : CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons a Fire Elemental that obeys the caster's commands. The
      Elemental's level is determined at random.
            a. 65% chance, level 12 
            b. 20% chance, level 16
            c. 10% chance, level 20
            d.  5% chance, level 24
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds, or until killed
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 11, Rangers at level 29
Comments : The elementals this spell summons are tougher than those
      summoned by the mage version of this spell. The Fire Elementals
      generally have about 90 (or more) hitpoints. They inflict crushing
      damage, generally slightly better than the those inflicted by the
      elementals summoned by the mage version. Also, those hit by these
      fire elementals must save vs breath weapon or suffer about 2 
      additional fire damage. Fire elementals are immune to the effects
      of WEB (2M) or ENTANGLE (1D), allowing them to fight webbed or
      entangled enemies in affected areas. They are also immune to fire
      damage, allowing to cast fire-based area-effect spells like 
      PRODUCE FIRE (4D), FIREBALL (3M), FLAME STRIKE (5C) and/or
      AGANNAZAR'S SCORCHER (2M) near them without damaging them. See
      also ANIMAL SUMMONING II (6D), INVISIBLE STALKER (6M), MONSTER
      SUMMONING IV (6M), SHADES (6M). 


L6-06 : DARTS OF BONE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Creates 9 darts (that cannot be unequipped) that the caster can
      use. The darts are +3 for determining what it can damage, each 
      dart does 3 to 7 (average of 5) missile damage. Anyone hit by them
      must save vs death or suffer an additional 2 to 12 (average of 7)
      magic damage and have their strength reduced by 3 points for 5
      rounds. The darts do not use proficiency bonus (or penalty), the
      caster can throw 2 darts per round.
Duration : 5 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments :


L6-07 : DEATH FOG
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration, Evocation
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Brings forth a billowing cloud of acidic fog everywhere within
      20 feet of cast point.
            1. Every creature within the affected area have their
                  movement rate lowered by 50 percent.
            2. They suffer 4 acid damage on the first round (when they
                  entered the affected area), then 8 acid damage on the
                  second, then 16 acid damage on the following rounds
                  (average total of 220 damage over 15 rounds).
            3. They must save vs spells every round or suffer a -2
                 penalty to strength and -2 penalty to dexterity, for
                 1 round.
Duration : 15 rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from :
      1. Bookshelf in Malavon's lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
Comments : The most powerful area-effect spell in the Mage's arsenal,
      it can damage most enemy types, and can kill Trolls as well. The
      effects of 2 or more Death Fog spells are cummulative. This spell
      works well with WEB (2M), STINKING CLOUD (2M), ENTANGLE (1D)
      and/or GREASE (1M). Another way of using this spell is to lure
      enemies with a Warrior, then cast OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M)
      on him, and cast a number of this spell over them. This spell has
      a long duration and therefore should not be used in easy battles
      (you can't save while active). See also SPIKE STONES (5D),
      CLOUDKILL (5M), SPIKE GROWTH (3D), SKULL TRAP (3M), GLYPH OF
      WARDING (3C).


L6-08 : DEATH SPELL
Spell : Mages, Bards 
School : Necromancy
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Snuffs out the lives of all creatures within 30 feet of cast
      point. The weaker the creatures, the more are affected. (If the
      game follows AD&D rules...) a number is generated from 4 to 80
      (average of 42). Each creature in the affected area, starting from
      lowlevel creatures going up, subtracts a corresponding number from
      that generated number; 1 for level 1 creatures, 2 for level 2 to
      level 4 (with 14 or less constitution) creatures, 10 for level 4
      (with 15 or more constitution) to level 6 (with 17 or less
      constitution), 20 for level 6 (with 18 or more constitution) to
      level 8 (with 17 or less constitution). All creatures that managed
      to subtract a number before the generated number reached 0 (or
      negative) dies. This spell affects only living creatures. Level 9
      and level 8 (with 18 or more constitution) are immune to the
      effects of this spell (I presume).    
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None/See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Bookshelf in Malavon's lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
Comments :


L6-09 : DISINTIGRATE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : A thin grey ray shoots from the caster to the target, making
      the target vanish. Creatures affected by this spell drop their
      items on the ground. If this spell affects party members, it will
      also remove their portraits so you won't be able to bring them
      back.
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from :
      1. Bookshelf in Malavon's lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
      2. Tomb on a wall, west of the first dungeon, Trials of the
            Luremaster
Comments : An instant kill spell. You can lower enemy saving throws with
      GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE
      (1CD). Since using this spell requires/encourages you to lower
      enemy saving throws, you should use it with lots of other
      similarly powerful spells like FLESH TO STONE (6M), HARM (6evilC),
      FEEBLEMIND (5M), HOLD MONSTER (5M), SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC),
      DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL DOMINATION (4C). If the target creature
      has high magic resistance, you can use LOWER RESISTANCE (5M) to
      lower it. If you have to choose between Bard or Mage, give this
      spell to your Mage (you won't get another one for a long time) and
      give Flesh To Stone to your Bard, so they'll both have insta-death
      spells.


L6-10 : ENTROPY SHIELD
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .9 round
Effect : Surrounds the caster with a defensive maelstrom of energy that
      blocks and deflects many attacks. 
            1. The caster gains +6 bonus to his AC.
            2. Gains +50 resistance to Acid, Cold, Fire and Electricity. 
            3. Gains +2 bonus to all his saving throws.
            4. Becomes immune to all missile-based attacks.
            5. Becomes immune to the following spells;
                  1. MAGIC MISSILE (1M), CHROMATIC ORB (1M), MAGICAL 
                        STONE (1C).
                  2. MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M).
                  3. FLAME ARROW (3M)
                  4. ICELANCE (4M)
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 11, Paladins and 
      Rangers at level 29
Comments : A very good AC-enhancing spell. This spell is mainly used to
      boost the caster's AC, especially in combats where the caster may
      be forced to fight melee. This spell can bring the Cleric's or
      the Druid's toughness to that comparable to a Fighter. It is also
      usually used with HASTE (3M) and EMOTION COURAGE (4M), when
      blitzkrieg-ing a map. This spell can also be used to protect
      againts Stone Nuisances' never-ending supply of Magic Missiles.
      See also TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION (6M). 


L6-11 : FIRE SEEDS
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Conjuration
Target : Caster's inventory 
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Creates 4 grenade-like missiles in the caster's inventory. 
      Each of these can be hurled doing 2 to 16 fire damage (average
      of 9) to a everyone within a five-foot-radius. Victims can save vs
      spells for half damage. 
Duration : [casterlevel x 1350(?)] rounds (or 1 day per level(?))
Avoidance : Casting will fail if there is no free room in the caster's
      inventory  
Obtain from :  Automatic; Druids at level 11, Rangers at level 29
Comments : A stalkable Troll/Revenant killing spell. Like GOODBERRY
      (2D), you can stockpile on Fire Seeds by casting it multiple times
      then resting, then casting it again, over and over. Contrary to
      the spell data, the Fire Seeds last far longer than 1 turn per
      level. Fire Seeds can be used to finish off Trolls or Revenants
      (use in QUICKSLOT). They can be handed to any character, freeing
      the caster to cast other spells. See also FLAME BLADE (2D),
      SUNSCORCH (1D), BURNING HANDS (1M).


L6-12 : FLESH TO STONE (Reverse of STONE TO FLESH)
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Turns the target into stone. The target then shatters, leaving
      carried items on the ground. 
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from :
      1. Table in Malavon's Lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
      2. Bookshelf, northeast, ground floor of the keep (balcony),
            Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : An instant kill spell. You can lower enemy saving throws with
      GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE
      (1CD). Since using this spell requires/encourages you to lower
      enemy saving throws, you should use it with lots of other
      similarly powerful spells like DISINTIGRATE (6M), HARM (6evilC),
      FEEBLEMIND (5M), HOLD MONSTER (5M), SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC),
      DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL DOMINATION (4C). If the target creature
      has high magic resistance, you can use LOWER RESISTANCE (5M) to
      lower it. This spell doesn't work on non-living creatures,
      including the undead.


L6-13 : GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Creates a faintly shimmering, magical sphere around the caster
      that prevents any first, second, third or fourth level spell from 
      penetrating (including beneficial spells), making the caster 
      immune to such spells. This includes innate abilities and effects
      from devices (such as traps). 
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : 
      1. Closet in Kontik's lair, Frost Giant cave, Wyrm's Tooth 
Comments : This level 6 spell is only slightly better than its level 4
      counterpart. This spell makes the caster immune to DISPEL MAGIC
      (3C/3M), MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M), WEB (2M), STINKING CLOUD (3M),
      MISCAST MAGIC (3C), mage's CONFUSION (7C/4M), SILENCE 15' RADIUS
      (2C), MORDENKAINEN'S FORCE MISSILES (4M), BELTYN'S BURNING BLOOD
      (4M) and other potentially devastating level-4-and-below spells.
      You can also use this spell to protect the caster while he
      purposely detonates traps to remove them (note that some traps
      cannot be disarmed by activation or cannot be disarmed at all).
      Note that the use of this spell prevents the caster from casting
      MIRROR IMAGE (2M), INVISIBILITY (2M), STONESKIN (4M), or IMPROVED
      INVISIBILITY (4M) on himself. This spell will not protect the
      caster from attacks by creatures summoned by level-4-and-below
      spells. A Cleric-Mage can cast this spell without dispelling an
      existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on him. See also TENSER'S
      TRANSFORMATION (6M), TROLLISH FORTITUDE (6M), ANTIMAGIC SHELL
      (6M), LICH TOUCH (6M), STONESKIN (4M), VAMPIRIC TOUCH (3M), MIRROR
      IMAGE (2M), BLUR (2M), SHIELD (1M), OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE
      (4M). 


L6-14 : HARM (Reverse of HEAL)
Spell : Evil Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The caster touches the target then casts this spell, causing
      the target to lose all but 1 to 4 (average of 2.5) hitpoints.  
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 11
Comments : An instant kill spell (well, almost). You can lower enemy
      saving throws with GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER
      (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD). Since using this spell requires/
      encourages you to lower enemy saving throws, you should use it
      with lots of other similarly powerful spells like DISINTIGRATE
      (6M), FLESH TO STONE (6M), FEEBLEMIND (5M), HOLD MONSTER (5M),
      SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC), DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL DOMINATION
      (4C). If the target creature has high magic resistance, you can
      use LOWER RESISTANCE (5M) to lower it. This spell won't work on
      non-living creatures, including the undead.


L6-15 : HEAL 
Spell : Non-evil Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Touch  
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : The caster lays his hand on the target then casts this spell, 
      curing the target of all physical afflictions and restoring him to
      maximum health. Physical afflictions include blindness, disease,
      feeblemind (FEEBLEMIND (5M) spell), poison and deafness. 
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 11, Paladins and 
      Rangers at level 29
Comments : The second best healing spell in the game. This spell is best
      used only on characters with near death hitpoints, to maximize the
      healing effect. Although it can be used (just) to cure various
      afflictions, a DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M) is cheaper and should be used
      instead (for that purpose). This spell has a long casting time, so
      you have to provide protection to the caster (usually by means of
      distraction). See also CURE CRITICAL WOUNDS (5nonevilCD), CURE
      SERIOUS WOUNDS (4CD), CURE MODERATE WOUNDS (2CD), GOODBERRY (2D),
      CURE LIGHT WOUNDS (1CD), NEUTRALIZE POISON (4C), CURE DISEASE
      (3C).


L6-16 : INVISIBLE STALKER
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons an Invisible Stalker, a creature, native to the
      Elemental Plane of Air.

      Invisible Stalker statistics :
            Has about 60 hitpoints
            Has about 40 resistance to lightning damage
            Has about 40 resistance to fire damage
            Has about 25 resistance to cold damage
            Has about 25 resistance to acid damage
            Does about 11 slashing damage per hit
            1(?) attack per round

Duration : 112.5 rounds (or 2 hours)
Avoidance : 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Nym's Exotic Goods, svirfneblin village via Marketh's Mines,
            Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
Comments :


L6-17 : LICH TOUCH
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Gives the caster the powers of a Lich's touch and Lich 
      immunities.
            1. The caster becomes immune to paralysis and fear.
            2. His hands glow with an unearthly green radiance, any
                  creature he touches (requires attack roll) suffers
                  1 to 10 (average of 5.5) cold damage and becomes
                  paralyzed for 10(?) rounds. (I don't know what the
                  saving throw is for.)
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Nym's Exotic Goods, svirfneblin village via Marketh's Mines,
            Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
Comments : Special tactics spell. Give this spell to your Bard, who can
      make better use of TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION. Have the Bard cast
      STONESKIN (4M) and MIRROR IMAGE (2M). Then cast PROTECTION FROM
      EVIL 10' RADIUS (4C), SPIRIT ARMOR (4M), HASTE (3M), and
      CHAMPION'S STRENGTH (5C) on him. Finally, have the Bard cast MINOR
      GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M), this spell, then Tenser's
      Transformation. Have the Bard use melee weapons while the rest use
      ranged weapons, and attack the enemies. This is a good rush
      combination that stuns enemies while you attack them. Lich Touch
      won't work on the undead. 


L6-18 : MONSTER SUMMONING IV ( MONSTER SUMMONING 4 )
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Summons 1 to 3 (average of 2) level 4 monsters under your
      control. Mostly Ogres, Ghasts, or Yetis.   
Duration : [casterlevel + 5] rounds 
Avoidance : Maximum 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Nym's Exotic Goods, svirfneblin village via Marketh's Mines,
            Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
      2. Bookshelf, northeast, ground floor of the keep (balcony),
            Trials of the Luremaster 
Comments : The creatures this spell summons are weak, as such they are
      only good at attacking spellcasters and perhaps distracting them.
      See also CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6D/5M), INVISIBLE STALKER (6M),
      SHADES (6M).


L6-19 : OTILUKE'S FREEZING SPHERE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration, Evocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Fires an orb of cold at the target, inflicting [casterlevel x
      [3 to 6]] cold damage.

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 12 caster, 54 average damage
            Level 15, 67.5 damage
            Level 20, 90 damage
            Level 25, 112.5 damage
            Level 30, 135 damage
  
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to avoid effect (dodged)
Obtain from :
      1. Closet in Kontik's lair, Frost Giant cave, Wyrm's Tooth
Comments : A very powerful attack spell... so long as your target fails
      his save. When using this spell, if possible, cast GREATER MALISON
      (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C), and/or CURSE (1CD) first to
      lower the enemy's saving throw. This spell is best learned by
      Bards, who level up alot faster than Mages. See also
      MORDENKAINEN'S FORCE MISSILES (4M), VITRIOLIC SPHERE (4M), FLAME
      ARROW (3M), MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M), SUNSCORCH (1D), MAGIC MISSILE
      (1M).


L6-20 : POWER WORD SILENCE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : The target becomes silenced, he cannot cast spells or do
      anything that requires using his voice.
Duration : 2 rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from :
      1. Barrel, east, abandoned city (to Malavon's lair), Lower Dorn's
            Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
Comments : A good disrupter/anti-spellcaster spell. Cast againts
      powerful spellcasters when they are casting spells to disrupt
      them. See also MAGIC MISSILE (1M), LARLOCH'S MINOR DRAIN (1M),
      SHROUD OF FLAME (5M), MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M), BELTYN'S BURNING
      BLOOD (4M), MISCAST MAGIC (3C).


L6-21 : SHADES
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Shapes material from the Demiplane of Shadow into semi-real 
      illusions of one or more monsters under your control. These
      shadowy creatures have only 60%(?) of the hitpoints of their
      real-world counterparts although their attacks do full damage. The
      spell summons... 
            i.   [1 to casterlevel] level Shade, of a random monster
            ii.  [1 to [casterlevel - levels of first creature]] level
                  Shade, of a random monster 
            iii. [1 to [casterlevel - sum of the levels of the previous
                 creatures] level Shade, of a random monster
            ... and so on until no levels are left.    
      (In short, it summons 1 to 6 Shades, the sum of their levels is
      equal or less than the caster's level. The form of the
      Shades are mostly Trolls (killable only by fire and acid), Umber
      Hulks (with confusion-causing gaze), Lizard Men and/or Goblin
      Elites.)
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Bookshelf in Malavon's lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
Comments :


L6-22 : SOL'S SEARING ORB (the Sun's/Solar(?) Searing Orb)
Spell : Clerics, Druids, Paladins, Rangers
School : Invocation
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 6 round
Effect : Hurls a brilliant searing flash at a target. When it hits, it
      explodes in a flash of light. 
            a. If target fails to saves vs spells...
                  a. He take 6 to 72 fire damage (average of 39) and 
                        becomes blinded (-4 penalty to THAC0, -4 penalty
                        to AC) for 1 to 6 rounds (average of 3.5). 
                  b. If the target is an undead, he takes double that
                        damage (average of 78) and becomes blinded (-4
                        penalty to THAC0, -4 penalty to AC) for 1 to 6
                        rounds (average of 3.5). 
            b. If target saves vs spells.
                  a. He takes 3 to 36 fire damage (average of 19.5).
                  b. If the target is an undead, he takes double that
                        damage (average of 39).
Duration : See effect
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 11, Paladins and 
      Rangers at level 29
Comments : A powerful attack spell against the undead that does alot of
      damage early on. This spell is best used on high priority undead
      targets such as Liches, Mummies, etc to kill them quickly before
      they can cause alot of damage. See also MORDENKAINEN'S FORCE
      MISSILES (4M), FLAME ARROW (3M), SUNSCORCH (1D), MAGIC MISSILE
      (1M), MAGICAL STONE (1C).


L6-23 : SOUL EATER
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : Living creatures within 10 feet of cast point suffer 3 to 24 
      (average of 13.5) magic damage. Any creature that dies as a result
      of this damage are obliterated and their essense is transformed
      into level 3 Skeletons under the caster's control. Also, the
      caster recieves a cummulative +1 bonus to strength, +1 bonus to
      dexterity, +1 bonus to constitution for every creature that dies
      in this manner. These bonuses last for 10 rounds. Skeletons
      produced by this spell last forever until they are killed or until
      the party leaves the area.
Duration : See effect 
Avoidance : None/6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : This spell works best with TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION (6M) 
      (unless the caster is a Fighter-Mage). First cast STRENGTH (2M)
      and/or CAT'S GRACE (2M) on the caster if necessary. Then cast
      MONSTER SUMMONING I (3M), cast it once or twice until you have 6
      summoned creatures. Then cast this spell on them (as they are easy
      to kill), then cast Tenser's Transformation. This is useful for
      soloist characters, or when rushing a map with HASTE (3M) spell.
      This spell works better with Bards as they level-up alot faster
      than Mages, thus making better use of Tenser's Transformation.
      

L6-24 : SPIRITUAL WRATH
Spell : Clerics, Paladins 
School : Invocation
Target : Angle
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : The caster becomes the focus of spiritual energy, then those
      energies shoot out in 4 directions (you specified the angle of the
      front one). Any creature with a different moral alignment to the
      caster (good/neutral/evil) that is hit by those energies suffer
      6 to 42 (average of 24) magic damage.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to suffer only half damage
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 11, Paladins at level 29
Comments :

L6-25 : STONE TO FLESH
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration 
Target : Portrait
Range : Anywhere
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Brings back a party member killed by petrification, the 
      character has only 1 hitpoint and is carrying no equipment (all
      equipment is dropped upon being turned to stone (and shattering)).
Duration :
Avoidance :
Obtain from :
      1. Nym's Exotic Goods, svirfneblin village via Marketh's Mines,
            Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
Comments : Works like RAISE DEAD (5nonevilC), except on characters
      killed by petrification. It is generally better to just buy STONE
      TO FLESH scrolls (which can be used by anybody), instead of
      memorizing this spell because you usually don't know when you're
      gonna need it. See also PROTECTION FROM PETRIFICATION (2M), FLESH 
      TO STONE (6M).


L6-26 : TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration, Evocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Changes the caster into a heroic fighter.
            1. The caster's hitpoints is doubled.
            2. He gains a +4 bonus to his AC.
            3. His THAC0 is changed to that of a fighter of the caster's
                  level.
            4. He can attack 2 times per round.
            5. He cannot cast any spell.  
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Table in Malavon's Lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
      2. Bookshelf, northeast, ground floor of the keep (balcony),
            Trials of the Luremaster 
      3. Crate, southeast of the fourth dungeon below the keep (the one 
            with Jackalweres), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : Ah yes, crazy Tenser. This spell mainly used to beef up the
      caster's toughness when blitzkrieg-ing an area (with HASTE (3M)
      and other support spells). Tenser's Transformation works well with
      alot of other spells. Multiple TROLLISH FORTITUDE (6M) can make
      the caster regenerate life; STONESKIN (4M), SPIRIT ARMOR (4M),
      MIRROR IMAGE (2M), PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M) and other
      protective spells can make the caster harder to hit; STRENGTH (2M)
      and SOUL EATER (6M) can greatly increase the caster's strength;
      you can also use it with LICH TOUCH (6M) or CHILL TOUCH (1M) for
      some weirder results. Always cast this spell after MINOR GLOBE OF
      INVULNERABILITY (4M) or GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (6M) to prevent
      DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M) from affecting the caster. You will only get
      1 Tenser's Transformation scroll in IWD proper, you won't get
      another one for a very long time. If you have to choose between
      your Bard or your Mage, give it to your Bard as he levels up alot
      quicker than Mages (making better use of the THAC0 bonus and
      Stoneskin spell). He can also wear better armor and weapons, and
      has more hitpoints. Tenser's Transformation does not prevent the
      use of Bard songs or Thief skills. Additional hitpoints caused by
      VAMPIRIC TOUCH (3M) is ignored when determining the caster's
      hitpoints when Tenser's Transformation is cast. Tenser is a
      powerful mage in Greyhawk (male human, level 20, human, lawful
      good alignment, 10STR, 16DEX, 16CON, 17INT, 11WIS, 18CHA). He is a
      member of the Circle of Eight, a powerful group of (8) mages.
      Tenser has a knack for creating weird spells (ie. Tenser's
      Fortunes of War (6M), Tenser's Primal Fury (5M), Tenser's Running
      Warrior (4M), Tenser's Floating Disk (1M)). See also ENTROPY
      SHIELD (6CD).


L6-27 : TROLLISH FORTITUDE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Imbues the caster with the resilience of a Troll, allowing the
      caster to regenerate 5 hitpoints per round up to his maximum
      hitpoints. 
Duration : 20 rounds (heals up to 100 hitpoints)
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : An alternative defensive spell to TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION
      (6M) that doesn't prevent spellcasting. The effects of 2 or more
      Trollish Fortitude spells are cummulative, cast it 4 times and
      the caster will regenerate 20 hitpoints per round. Use this spell
      with VAMPIRIC TOUCH (3M) and protection spells in hard battles
      where your mage might get hit alot. Alternatively, you can use
      this spell with Tenser's Transformation for beefed-up toughness
      minus the spellcasting ability. Always use this spell with MINOR
      GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (4M) or GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY (6M) to
      prevent DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M) from affecting it. If you have a
      Bard, give it to him instead of your mage as he has more hitpoints
      and can make better use of Tenser's Transformation. Just incase
      you did'nt notice (yeah right), Trolls regenerate life, that's why
      this spell's named so. See also STONESKIN (4M), SPIRIT ARMOR (4M),
      MIRROR IMAGE (2M), BLUR (2M), SHIELD (1M), PROTECTION FROM EVIL
      (1CD/1M).


L6-28 : WHIRLWIND
Spell : Druids, Rangers
School : Invocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .9 round
Effect : Creates a small whirlwind near the caster, which the caster can
      direct to a location within his sight. Once the whirlwind reaches
      its destination, the caster will lose control and the whirlwind 
      will fly around randomly harming friend or foe alike. The caster
      is immune to this spell, so are elementals and other large
      creatures. 
            1. The whirlwind does...
                   1. 2 to 16 crushing damage (average of 9)
                   2. 2 to 16 slashing damage (average of 9)
            2. Creatures it hits must save vs breath weapon or be 
                  stunned (cannot move/attack/cast/defend) for 2 rounds.
            3. Level 2 and 1 creatures it hits are automatically killed.
Duration : 
      a. 10 rounds 
      b. Until it already hits 8 creatures 
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 11, Rangers at level 29
Comments :





---
LEVEL 7 SPELLS


L7-01 : ACID STORM
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Rains acid everywhere within 20 feet of cast point. All
      creatures in the affected area suffer 1 to 4 (average of 2.5) acid
      damage every round for 3 rounds, then they suffer 1 to 6  (average
      of 3.5) acid damage for the next 3 rounds, lastly they suffer 1 to
      8 (average of 4.5) acid damage for the next [casterlevel - 6]
      rounds.  

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 14 caster, 54 average combined damage over 14 rounds
            Level 15, 58.5 damage (over 15 rounds, etc)
            Level 20, 81 damage
            Level 25, 103.5 damage
            Level 30, 126 damage 

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : None/See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Nym's Exotic Goods, svirfneblin village via Marketh's Mines,
            Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
      2. Bookshelf, southeast, second floor of the keep, Trials of the
            Luremaster 
Comments : The most effective anti-spellcaster spell. The effects of 2
      or more Acid Storm spells are cummulative (each acting
      independently). This spell has no saving throw and will keep
      disrupting its spellcaster victims for a very, very long time.
      Just make sure to keep your spellcasters away from its area of
      effect. See also INSECT PLAGUE (5D), SILENCE 15' RADIUS (2C),
      SHROUD OF FLAME (5M), BELTYN'S BURNING BLOOD (4M), MELF'S ACID
      ARROW (2M).


L7-02 : CONFUSION
Spell : Clerics
School : Enchantment/ Charm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Causes confusion in [1 to 4] + [integer of [casterlevel / 2]]
      hostile creatures within 20 feet of cast point. Affected creatures
      randomly...
            a. Attack nearest creature
            b. Stand still
            c. Walk aimlessly

      Affected creatures progression (summary) :
            Level 14, average of 9.5 possible victims
            Level 20, 12.5
            Level 30, 17.5

Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : Save vs spells with -2 penalty to avoid effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 14
Comments : A poorer version of the level 4 mage equivalent. It has a
      longer casting time and smaller area of effect. Even if you don't
      have a mage, don't use this spell; use SYMBOL OF HOPELESSNESS (7C)
      instead. This spell doesn't work on the undead. See also CHAOS
      (5M), RIGID THINKING (3C), CLOAK Of FEAR (4C), HORROR (2M),
      EMOTION FEAR (4M).


L7-03 : CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL
Spell : Druids
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons an Earth Elemental that obeys the caster's commands.
      The Elemental's level is determined at random.
            a. 65% chance, level 12
            b. 20% chance, level 16
            c. 10% chance, level 20
            d.  5% chance, level 24
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 14
Comments : The elementals this spell summons are tougher than those
      summoned by the mage version of this spell. The Earth Elementals
      generally have about 90 (or more) hitpoints. They inflict crushing
      damage, generally slightly better than the those inflicted by the
      elementals summoned by the mage version. They are immune to the
      effects of WEB (2M) or ENTANGLE (1D), allowing them to fight
      webbed or entangled enemies in affected areas. See also STALKER
      (7D), CREEPING DOOM (7D), MONSTER SUMMONING V (7M). 


L7-04 : CREEPING DOOM
Spell : Druids
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Summons 1(?) to 6 swarms of insects under your control. 

      "Creeping Doom" statistics :
            About 150 hitpoints each
            Completely immune to missile damage
            75% resistant to slashing damage
            About 66% resistant to piercing damage
            Does about 30 piercing damage per hit
            1(?) attack per round

Duration : 10 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 14
Comments : High-damage, highly resistant summoned creatures. These
      creatures are excellent for rushing an area (with HASTE (3M) and
      other support spells). They are also excellent againts slashing
      opponents (those with swords or claws). They can also be cast
      behind enemy spellcasters to give them a run for their money. 
      See also STALKER (7D), CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL (7D/5M), MONSTER
      SUMMONING V (7M).  


L7-05 : DESTRUCTION (Reverse of RESURRECTION)
Spell : Evil Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 (living) creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : The caster touches the target then casts this spell. Upon
      completion the target is destroyed into small chunks (/gory death)
      (it's suppose to be turned to dust - opposite of resurrect). If
      this spell affects party members, it will also remove their
      portraits so you won't be able to bring them back.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs death with a -4 penalty to suffer 8 to 48 (average
      of 28) magic damage instead.
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 14
Comments : An instant kill spell. You can lower enemy saving throws with
      GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE
      (1CD). Since using this spell requires/encourages you to lower
      enemy saving throws, you should use it with lots of other
      similarly powerful spells like FINGER OF DEATH (7M), DISINTIGRATE
      (6M), FLESH TO STONE (6M), HARM (6evilC), FEEBLEMIND (5M), HOLD
      MONSTER (5M), SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC), DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL
      DOMINATION (4C). If the target creature has high magic resistance,
      you can use LOWER RESISTANCE (5M) to lower it. This spell won't
      work on non-living creatures, including the undead.


L7-06 : FINGER OF DEATH
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .5 round
Effect : The caster utters the finger of death incantation then points
      his finger at the intended target, causing the target to die.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : Save vs spells to suffer 3 to 17 (average of 10) magic
      damage instead.
Obtain from : 
      1. Chest in Malavon's lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
Comments : An instant kill spell. You can lower enemy saving throws with
      GREATER MALISON (4M), RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE
      (1CD). Since using this spell requires/encourages you to lower
      enemy saving throws, you should use it with lots of other
      similarly powerful spells like DESTRUCTION (7evilC), DISINTIGRATE
      (6M), FLESH TO STONE (6M), HARM (6evilC), FEEBLEMIND (5M), HOLD
      MONSTER (5M), SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC), DOMINATION (5M) and MENTAL
      DOMINATION (4C). If the target creature has high magic resistance,
      you can use LOWER RESISTANCE (5M) to lower it. If you have to
      choose between Bard or Mage, give this spell to your Mage (who can
      cast more). Just in case you're wondering, this spell works on
      undead creatures. 


L7-07 : FIRE STORM 
Spell : Druids
School : Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Covers the area within 25 feet of cast point with roaring
      flames. All creatures in the affected area suffer [[2 to 16] + 
      casterlevel] fire damage, save vs spells for half damage. 

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 14 caster, 23 average damage (per victim)
            Level 20, 29 damage
            Level 25, 34 damage
            Level 30, 39 damage

Duration : 1 round 
Avoidance : See effect 
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 14
Comments : A wide area effect spell. Okay, okay, so it does a mere
      FIREBALL (3M) damage, but a least it looks really cool. Just press
      PRINT SCREEN while using it, and send the PIC to your friends (who
      don't play this game) to impress them. See also ICE STORM (4M),
      CLOUDBURST (3D). 


L7-08 : EARTHQUAKE
Spell : Druids
School : Alteration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Causes a local tremor to rip through the ground. All hostile
      creatures within sight of the caster suffer 6 to 42 (average of
      24) crushing damage and must save vs death or fall prone for 3
      rounds. Huge creatures and creatures level 10 or higher, are
      immune to the effects of this spell.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 14
Comments :


L7-09 : GREATER SHIELD OF LATHANDER
Spell : Good Clerics
School : Conjuration
Target : 1 non-evil creature
Range : Touch
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Grants the target immunity to all damage.
Duration : 3 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 14
Comments :


L7-10 : HOLY WORD
Spell : Good Clerics
School : Conjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Turns the caster into a bridge between his god and the Prime
      Material Plane (um, basically where most AD&D players do their
      roleplaying), allowing him to funnel magical energy to smite all
      creatures of evil alignment within 30 feet of him. Affected
      creatures suffer depending on their level...
            a. Level 3 and below creatures die
            b. Level 4 to 7 creatures are stunned (unable to move/
                  attack/cast/defend) for 10 rounds
            c. Level 8 to 11 creatures are slowed (-4 penalty to AC, -4
                  penalty to THAC0) and have a 75 percent chance of
                  spellcasting failure, for 10 rounds
            d. Level 12 and above creatures are deafened (50 percent
                  chance of spellcasting failure) for 10 rounds
Duration : See effect
Avoidance : None  
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 14
Comments : A set-up spell. This spell can be cast without dispelling an
      existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on the caster. This enables the
      caster to move towards a group of (evil) enemies and cast this
      spell without getting attacked. Note that most enemies in later
      levels can sense Sanctuaried characters and attack other members
      instead. See also UNHOLY WORD (7evilC), BLADE BARRIER (6C), UNDEAD
      WARD (5C), CLOAK OF FEAR (4C), RECITATION (4C), CIRCLE OF BONES
      (3nongoodC), PRAYER (3C).
 

L7-11 : IMPERVIOUS SANCTITY OF THE MIND
Spell : Clerics, Druids 
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Protects the caster's mind againts any outside influence;
      making him immune to charm, command, confusion, domination, fear,
      feeblemind, hold, sleep, or any psionic attack.
Duration : [casterlevel x 10] rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics and Druids at level 14
Comments : All-in-one mind protection spell. The spell's long duration
     and range of protection make it a useful spell to memorize if
     you don't plan to use any other level 7 spell. See also CHAOTIC
     COMMANDS (5C), PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10' RADIUS (4C), FREE ACTION
     (4C), EXALTATION (3C), RESIST FEAR (2M), PROTECTION FROM EVIL
     (1CD/1M), REMOVE FEAR (1CD). 


L7-12 : MALAVON'S RAGE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Shoots darts of pure energy out from the caster's body in all
      direction. Any creature within 15 feet of the caster suffers 20
      to 80 (average of 50) piercing damage, save vs spells to suffer
      only half damage.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. On Malavon (real), Malavon's lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through
            Wyrm's Tooth)
Comments :


L7-13 : MASS INVISIBILITY
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Illusion/ Phantasm
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : All friendly creatures within 30 feet of cast point are 
      individually affected with INVISIBILITY (2M). 
            1. They are ignored by enemies.
            2. They cannot be attacked physically.
            3. Spells that require targeting specific units won't work 
                  on any of them (spellcasting won't initiate), this 
                  includes healing/ protective spells.
      The invisibility lasts for 225(?) rounds (or 4 hours), any 
      recipient who attacks/casts any spell/opens any storage/
      pickpockets/removes trap will break his invisibility.    
Duration : See effect
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Chest in Malavon's lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
Comments : An anti-ambush spell. This spell is used to get the party out
      of a bad position, such as being attacked from 2 or 3 sides in a
      tight area. Usually after casting this spell, what you do is
      either move the party into a tight corner with enemies on 1 side
      only, and attack from there. Another one is to stay away from 1
      Fighter, then have the Fighter attack to come out of invisibility.
      When all of the enemies are attacking him, cast OTILUKE'S
      RESILIENT SPHERE (4M) on him then area effect spells like DEATH
      FOG (6M), SPIKE STONES (5D), CLOUDKILL (5M)... you know the drill.
      Another use of this spell is get your party safely out of a
      dangerous area after blitzkrieg-ing an area with a HASTE (3M)
      spell. See also IMPROVED INVISIBILITY (4M), INVISIBILITY (2M),
      SANCTUARY (1C).


L7-14 : MIST OF ELDATH
Spell : Druids 
School : Invocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Blankets the area within 10 feet of cast point with a silver-
      blue mist. Any creature with the area of effect is cured of 
      disease, cured of poison, and is healed by by 25 points.
Duration : 1 round
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 14
Comments : A healing spell for parties that mostly fights melee (where
      the damage is usually scattered among members). Although the
      amount of life healed is small, it heals everyone in the area.
      For maximum effect, the caster should memorize 2 or more of this
      spell. This spell will heal all creatures in its area of effect,
      including hostile creatures, so cast it inbetween fights. Eldath
      (neutral good alignment), is the goddess of quiet places, springs,
      pools, peace, waterfalls and druid groves. If you remember that
      Albion (in Dragon's Eye) was passing off as an eldathyn priest.
      See also HEAL (6nonevilCD), CURE CRITICAL WOUNDS (5nonevilCD),
      CURE SERIOUS WOUNDS (4CD), CURE DISEASE (3C), GOODBERRY (2D), CURE
      MODERATE WOUNDS (2CD), CURE LIGHT WOUNDS (1CD).


L7-15 : MONSTER SUMMONING V ( MONSTER SUMMONING 5 )
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .6 round
Effect : Summons 1 to 3 (average of 2) level 5 monsters; mostly Giant
      Spiders, Ju-ju Zombies or Minotaurs. 
Duration : [casterlevel + 6] rounds
Avoidance : Maximum 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Barrel, east, abandoned city (to Malavon's lair), Lower Dorn's
            Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
Comments : The creatures this spell summons are weak, as such they are
      only good at attacking spellcasters and perhaps distracting them.
      See also STALKER (7D), CREEPING DOOM (7D), CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL
      (7D).


L7-16 : MORDENKAINEN'S SWORD
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Evocation
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Equips the caster with a shimmering sword of force, that can
      that can be mentally controlled by the caster to strike enemies
      within sight of the caster. 
            1. The sword does 5 to 30 (average of 17.5) slashing damage,
                  no strength or proficiency modifier is applied.
            2. The THAC0 of the caster (and therefore of the sword) is
                  set to that of a Fighter half the level of the caster.
            3. The sword is +2(?) for determining what enemies are
                  vulnerable to it.
Duration : [casterlevel] rounds
Avoidance : None
Obtain from :
      1. Barrel, center, abandoned city (to Malavon's lair), Lower
            Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
Comments : A convenient high-damage weapon unaffected by the caster's
      strength. This spell works best with TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION (6M),
      giving the caster better THAC0 and attack rate. This combination
      works well when rushing maps (with HASTE (3M)), giving the caster
      good protection and the ability to deal heavy damage from long
      range. If you have a Bard, you should give this spell to him (as
      oppose to your Mage) because he can make better use of Tenser's
      Transformation. Mordenkainen is a ridiculously powerful Mage
      (Human Male, level 20, True Neutral, 10str, 17dex, 17con, 18int,
      15wis, 18cha) in Greyhawk. He is a member of the Circle of Eight,
      a powerful group of (8) mages. Mordenkainen specializes in
      combat-related spells with more direct applications (especially
      for AD&D roleplayers - obviously a favorite of the writers)(ie.
      Mordenkainen's Disjuntion (9M), Mordenkainen's Magnificent Mansion
      (7M), Mordenkainen's Phantom Guardian (6M)). See also LICH TOUCH
      (6M), DARTS OF BONE (6M), DECASTAVE (2M), CHILL TOUCH (1M).


L7-17 : POWER WORD STUN
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : 1 creature
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : The caster utters the spell, causing the target to be stunned
      (unable to move, attack, cast, or defend).
Duration : Depends on target's current hitpoints. 
            a. 30 or below hitpoints, 4 to 16 (average of 10) rounds
            b. 31 to 60 hitpoints, 2 to 8 (average of 5) rounds
            c. 61 to 90 hitpoints, 1 to 4 (average of 2.5) rounds
Avoidance : Creatures with more than 90 (current) hitpoints are immune
      to this spell
Obtain from :
      1. Barrel, center, abandoned city (to Malavon's lair), Lower
            Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
      2. Bookshelf in room, northeast, second floor of the keep, Trials
            of the Luremaster
      3. Barrel north of 3rd dungeon beneath the keep (the one with the
            bard), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : Excellent for killing mages who usually don't have alot of 
      life. This spell doesn't work on the undead. See also SYMBOL OF
      HOPELESSNESS (7C), LICH TOUCH (6M), HOLD MONSTER (5M), HOLD PERSON
      (3M/2C), ICELANCE (3M), HOLD ANIMAL (3D), WEB (2M), GHOUL TOUCH
      (2M), CHROMATIC ORB (1M).


L7-18 : PRISMATIC SPRAY
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Angle
Range : 70 feet
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Causes shimmering rays of light to flash from the caster's
      hand, in a cone 70 feet long and 15 feet wide at it's end (long,
      narrow one). 
            1. Creatures within the area of effect suffer randomly :
                  a. Red : Suffer 20 magic damage, save vs spells for 
                        half damage
                  b. Orange : Suffer 40 magic damage, save vs spells for
                        half damage
                  c. Yellow : Suffer 80 magic damage, save vs spells for
                        half damage
                  d. Green : Die, save vs poison to suffer 20 poison
                        damage instead
                  e. Blue : Turned to stone, save vs petrify to avoid
                        effect
                  f. Indigo : Go insane (?), save vs wands to avoid
                        effect
            2. If they are at level 7 or below, they are also blinded 
                  (-4 penalty to AC, -4 penalty to THAC0) for 2 to 8
                  (average of 5) rounds.                    
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Nym's Exotic Goods, svirfneblin village via Marketh's Mines,
            Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
      2. Bookshelf, southeast, second floor of the keep, Trials of the
            Luremaster 
Comments : A decent attack spell. This spell is best used againts
      multiple opponents. Stop enemies with WEB (2M), ENTANGLE (1D) or
      with a friendly creature affected by OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE
      (4M), then use this spell. On a side note, the AD&D version has
      7 colors with Violet sending you to another plane, lol. See also
      COLOR SPRAY (1M), CHROMATIC ORB (1M).


L7-19 : RESURRECTION
Spell : Good Clerics
School : Necromancy
Target : Portrait
Range : Anywhere
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Brings a dead party member back to life with maximum hitpoints,
      and no afflictions. The party member is resurrected near the
      caster with no equipment (equipment is dropped upon death).
Duration : Permanent
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 14
Comments : The best healing spell in the game. Unlike RAISE DEAD (5D)
      this spell works on eleven characters. For this spell to work, you
      have to still have the portrait of the dead character. Some spells
      like DESTRUCTION (7evilC), FINGER OF DEATH (7M), DISINTIGRATE (6M)
      will also remove the portrait if cast successfully on party
      members, making the dead character... well, dead forever (the only
      way to resurrect him is through the "IMPORT CHARACTER" spell).
      This spell will not work on (the portraits of) characters that
      have been turned to stone. This spell can also be used to
      conveniently fully heal characters from long range (actually, from
      anywhere on the map). See also MIST OF ELDATH (7D), HEAL
      (6nonevilCD), CURE CRITICAL WOUNDS (5nonevilCD), CURE SERIOUS
      WOUNDS (4CD), CURE MODERATE WOUNDS (2CD), GOODBERRY (2D), CURE
      LIGHT WOUNDS (1CD), NEUTRALIZE POISON (4C), CURE DISEASE (3C).


L7-20 : SEVEN EYES
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Conjures 7 magical orbs that float in a ring above the caster's
      head, each of these "eyes" has a defensive or offensive 
      capability. 
            1. Eye of the Mind : Protects the caster from 1 mental
                  attack (charm/emotion/fear,etc), unless the caster
                  uses it to cast (a free) CHARM PERSON (1M).
            2. Eye of the Sword : Protects the caster from 1 physical
                  attack, unless the caster uses it to cast a (free) 
                  level 9 MAGIC MISSILE (1M) (average of 17.5 magic
                  damage).   
            3. Eye of Venom : Protects the caster from 1 attack or
                  effect that could poison the caster, unless the caster
                  uses it to poison 1 creature (30 poison damage over
                  30 seconds, save vs spells to avoid)
            4. Eye of the Mage : Protects the caster from 1
                  manifestation of fire, electrical, cold or acid
                  damage. Unless the caster uses it to cast a (free) 
                  Lightning Bolt that does 4 to 32 (average of 18) 
                  electrical damage.                  
            5. Eye of the Spirit : Protects the caster from 1 "death" 
                  spell (DEATH SPELL (6M)/ FINGER OF DEATH (7M)/ POWER
                  WORD KILL (9M)/ SLAY LIVING (5nongoodC)/ DESTRUCTION
                  (7evilC)), unless the caster uses it to cast (a free)
                  Ray of Enfeeblement (2M, enchantment/charm, reduce STR
                  to 5 for [casterlevel] rounds, save vs spells to avoid
                  effect).  
            6. Eye of Fortitude : Protects the caster from 1 stun, 
                  deafen, blind, or silence effect. Unless the caster
                  uses it to cast (a free) SHOUT (4M).
            7. Eye of Stone : Protects the caster from 1 petrification
                  effect, unless the caster uses it to cast (a free)
                  HOLD PERSON (3M/2C). 
Duration : 20 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : An underpowered, but multipurpose protection spell. Just use
      this spell for extra protection, you can always expend the "eyes"
      if the battle's going your way.


L7-21 : STALKER
Spell : Druids
School : Conjuration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : 1 round
Effect : Creates 2 Shambling Mounds that willingly aid the caster.

      Shambling Mound statistics :
            Has about 80 hitpoints
            About 85% or more resistant to crushing damage
            50% resistant to slashing damage
            50% resistant to missile damage
            50% resistant to piercing damage
            Immune to electricity damage
            Immune to fire damage
            50% resistant to cold damage
            Does about 11 crushing damage per hit
            1(?) attack per round
            Can cause target to be entangled and suffer small persistent
                  damage
            Leaves a regular club upon death

Duration : 450 rounds (or 8 hours)
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 14
Comments : The best cannon fodder in the game !! These guys are tough.
      You can use them guys to distract opponents, keeping them from
      attacking your party. You can even use INCENDIARY CLOUD (8M),
      GLYPH OF WARDING (3C), CHAIN LIGHTNING (6M), SUNFIRE (5M), FIRE
      STORM (7D), PRODUCE FIRE (4D), FIREBALL (3M), LIGHTNING BOLT (3M)
      and/or FLAME STRIKE (5C) near them since they're immune to fire
      and lightning. You can even use them to spread a SHROUD OF FLAME
      (5M) epidemic among your enemies. The only (small) problem with
      Shambling Mounds is that unlike Elementals, they are vulnerable to
      WEB (2M) and ENTANGLE (1D) spells. See also CREEPING DOOM (7D),
      CONJURE EARTH ELEMENTAL (7D/5M), MONSTER SUMMONING V (7M).


L7-22 : SUFFOCATE
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .7 round
Effect : Draws the breath out of all creatures within 10 feet of cast
      point, suffocating them. 
            a. Creatures within the area of effect must save vs spells
                  every round or suffer the following effects for 1
                  round.
                  1. -4 penalty to AC
                  2. -4 penalty to THAC0
                  3. Lose 6 points of dexterity 
                  4. Have their attack rate reduced by 1 (attack per
                        round)
                  5. Have their movement reduced by half
                  6. Suffer 4 to 32 (average of 18) magic damage
            b. Otherwise they suffer only 2 to 16 (average of 9) magic
                  damage.                    
Duration : 4 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : Use this spell later with IRON BODY (8M). Cast this on
      enemies while they are fighting someone who casted Iron Body. Give
      this spell to your Mage and not to your Bard (if you have a Mage).
      See also SYMBOL OF PAIN (7C), SLOW (3M), BLINDNESS (2M), ALICORN
      LANCE (2D), CHILL TOUCH (1M).


L7-23 : SUNRAY
Spell : Druids
School : Evocation, Alteration
Target : Area 
Range : Sight of caster 
Casting Time : .4 round
Effect : The caster evokes a dazzling beam of light from the sky that
      shines everywhere within 15 feet of cast point. 
            1. Creatures in the affected area must save vs spells every
                  round or be blinded (-4 penalty to AC, -4 penalty to
                  THAC0) for 1 to 3 (average of 2) rounds.
            2. Undead and Fungoid creatures, suffer an additional 8 to
                  48 (average of 28) every round (112 over 4 rounds).
                  Save vs spells for half damage (per round).   
Duration : 4 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Druids at level 14
Comments : This spell is mainly used as an area-damage spell againts the
      undead. It has a relatively small area of effect, but it does alot
      of damage over a short time. Use WEB (2M), ENTANGLE (1D) or
      OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M) to stop the enemies then cast this
      spell. You can also use a Warrior with good saving throws to bait
      undead creatures then cast this spell; as the risk for your
      character (who's not an undead) is only minimal. See also UNDEAD
      WARD (5C), WALL OF MOONLIGHT (4D).
 

L7-24 : SYMBOL OF HOPELESSNESS
Spell : Clerics
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Inscribes a floating Symbol of Hopelessness in the air, causing
      all hostile creatures within 60 feet of cast point (those looking
      at it) to be overcomed by hopelessness for 20 round unless they
      save vs spells with a -2 penalty. Affected creatures stand still
      demoralized and do nothing, they don't move, attack, cast spells
      or even defend themselves. 
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 14
Comments : A better version of the spell EMOTION HOPELESSNESS (4M).
      Unlike the mage version, this spell doesn't affect friendly
      creatures so you can use it in tight situations. Hopeless
      creatures will always get hit so don't hesitate to attack them,
      even with weak characters. The undead are immune to the effects of
      this spell. See also POWER WORD STUN (7M), LICH TOUCH (6M), HOLD
      MONSTER (5M), HOLD PERSON (3M/2C), ICELANCE (3M), HOLD ANIMAL
      (3D), WEB (2M), STINKING CLOUD (2M), GHOUL TOUCH (2M), CHROMATIC
      ORB (1M), GREATER COMMAND (5C).


L7-25 : SYMBOL OF PAIN
Spell : Clerics
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .3 round
Effect : Inscribes a floating Symbol of Pain in the air, causing
      all hostile creatures within 60 feet of cast point (those looking
      at it) to be overcomed by pain for 2 to 200 (average of 101)
      rounds unless they save vs spells. Affected creatures suffer a -4
      penalty to THAC0, -2 penalty to dexterity, and -2 penalty to AC.
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 14
Comments : High level weakening spell. Unlike SYMBOL OF HOPELESSNESS
      (7C), this spell works on undead creatures. This spell is useful
      againts strong/tough creatures, particularly againts the undead
      (since Symbol of Hopelessness is otherwise a better spell). For
      maximum results, cast this spell after GREATER MALISON (4M),
      RECITATION (4C), PRAYER (3C) and/or CURSE (1CD). Also, againts
      really strong/tough creatures, you should use this with SLOW (3M),
      ALICORN LANCE (2D), and/or BLINDNESS (2M). The advantage of using
      weakening spells over empowering spells is that you can take
      powerful opponents without having to use HASTE (3M) (and suffer
      fatigue as a result).  


L7-26 : UNHOLY WORD (Reverse of HOLY WORD)
Spell : Evil Clerics
School : Conjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Turns the caster into a bridge between his god and the Prime
      Material Plane (um, basically where most AD&D players do their
      roleplaying), allowing him to funnel magical energy to smite all
      creatures of good alignment within 30 feet of him. Affected
      creatures suffer depending on their level...
            a. Level 3 and below creatures die
            b. Level 4 to 7 creatures are stunned (unable to move/
                  attack/cast/defend) for 10 rounds
            c. Level 8 to 11 creatures are slowed (-4 penalty to AC, -4
                  penalty to THAC0) and have a 75 percent chance of
                  spellcasting failure, for 10 rounds
            d. Level 12 and above creatures are deafened (50 percent
                  chance of spellcasting failure) for 10 rounds
Duration : See effect
Avoidance : None  
Obtain from : Automatic; Clerics at level 14
Comments : A set-up spell. This spell can be cast without dispelling an
      existing SANCTUARY (1C) spell on the caster. This enables the
      caster to move towards a group of (good) enemies and cast this
      spell without getting attacked. Note that most enemies in later
      levels can sense Sanctuaried characters and attack other members
      instead. See also HOLY WORD (7goodC), BLADE BARRIER (6C), UNDEAD
      WARD (5C), CLOAK OF FEAR (4C), RECITATION (4C), CIRCLE OF BONES
      (3nongoodC), PRAYER (3C).






---
LEVEL 8 SPELLS


L8-01 : ABI-DALZIM'S HORRID WILTING
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Necromancy
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : Evaporates moisture from the bodies of every living creature 
      within 30 feet of cast point. 
            a.  Affected creatures must save vs spells or...
                  a. Suffer [casterlevel x [1 to 8]] magic damage
                  b. Water-using/dwelling creatures are instantly killed
            b. Otherwise they suffer only [[casterlevel x [1 to 8]] / 2] 
                  magic damage instead.

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 16 caster, 72 average damage (save failed), per victim
            Level 20, 90 damage
            Level 25, 112.5 damage
            Level 30, 135 damage

Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Kieran Nye, The Whistling Gallows, Lonelywood, Heart of Winter
Comments : A high-damage, large area-effect spell. This spell is best
      used with OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M), WEB (2M), ENTANGLE
      (1D) and/or GREASE (1M); to stop enemies first. This spell has a
      pretty big area, so make sure you cast it far away from your
      party. There is only 1 scroll of this spell in the whole game
      (TotL+HOW+IWD), don't give it to your Bard as it is unlikely that
      he'll get his only level 8 spell slot (level 29) in one game. See
      also SKULL TRAP (3M), GLYPH OF WARDING (3C), ACID STORM (7M), FIRE
      STORM (7D), DEATH SPELL (6M), ICE STORM (4M), FIREBALL (3M),
      SNILLOC'S SNOWBALL SWARM (2M).


L8-02 : GREAT SHOUT
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Invocation
Target : Angle
Range : 30 feet
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : The caster releases a stunning force from his mouth in a cone
      area from the caster 30 feet long, 10 feet wide at the fartesth 
      (long, narrow cone).
            1. Level 5 and below, creatures in the affected area are
                  instantly killed.
            2a. Other creatures in the area must save vs spells or...
                  1. Be stunned (unable to move/attack/cast/defend) for
                        2 rounds
                  2. Deafened (+50 percent spellcasting failure) for 4
                        rounds
                  3. Suffer 4 to 48 (average of 26) magic damage
            2b. Otherwise ...
                  1. Be stunned for 1 round
                  2. Deafened for 2 rounds
                  3. Suffer 4 to 24 (average of 14) magic damage               
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : An expensive disruptor spell. This spell is a little better
      than SHOUT (4M). You can use it againts spellcasters... but it's
      just darn expensive. POWER WORD SILENCE (6M) is generally a better
      alternative to this spell. See also MAGIC MISSILE (1M), LARLOCH'S
      MINOR DRAIN (1M), SHROUD OF FLAME (5M), MELF'S ACID ARROW (2M),
      BELTYN'S BURNING BLOOD (4M), MISCAST MAGIC (3C).


L8-03 : INCENDIARY CLOUD 
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration, Evocation
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .2 round
Effect : Brings forth a dense, smoky cloud covering everywhere within 10
      feet of cast point. On the first 2 rounds it's harmless. On the
      third round, it begins to spark and flame doing [casterlevel x 
      [1 to 2]] fire damage to every creature within the affected area.
      On the fourth round it does [casterlevel x [1 to 4]] fire damage,
      then drops back to [casterlevel x [1 to 2]] on the fifth round. 
      Affected creatures can save vs spells to suffer only half damage,
      per hit.

      Damage progression (summary) :
            Level 16 caster, 24 average damage on the third/fifth round
                             40 average damage on the fourth round
                             > 88 average total damage
            Level 20, 30 damage, third/fifth
                      50 damage, fourth
                      > 110 total damage
            Level 25, 37.5 damage, third/fifth
                      62.5 damage, fourth
                      > 137 total damage
            Level 30, 45 damage, third/fifth
                      75 damage, fourth
                      > 165 total damage

Duration : 5 rounds
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Chest in Malavon's lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
Comments : A high-damage, area effect spell. This spell works best with
      OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE (4M), WEB (2M), ENTANGLE (1D) and/or
      GREASE; to stop enemies in their tracks. It also works well with
      STALKER (7D) or CONJURE FIRE ELEMENTAL (6D/5M); use them (who are
      immune to fire) to distract enemies while you cast this spell.
      Don't give this spell to your Bard as he'll only get 1 level 8
      spell, and most probably won't get it (level 29) in one game. See
      also ABI-DALZIM'S HORRID WILTING (8M), DEATH FOG (6M), CLOUDKILL
      (5M), SPIKE STONES (5D), SPIKE GROWTH (3D), SKULL TRAP (3M), GLYPH
      OF WARDING (3C).


L8-04 : IRON BODY
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Alteration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : Transforms the caster's body into living iron.
            1. The caster gains +100 electrical resistance, +50 fire
                  resistance, and +25 crushing resistance.
            4. His strength is set to 25 (effect : +14 to damage, +7
                  bonus to THAC0).
            5. He can attack 2 times per round, doing 2 to 8 crushing
                  damage (16 to 22 with strength bonus; average of 19)
                  per hit.
            6. His movement is slowed to 25 percent of normal rate.
            7. Spells that affect the respiration or the physiology of
                  the caster is ignored.  
            8. The caster cannot cast any spell while this spell is in
                  effect.
Duration : 20 rounds
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : A hard-to-use spell. Give this spell to your Bard instead of
      your Mage. Cast VAMPIRIC TOUCH (3M) multiple times on summoned
      creatures, then cast STONESKIN (4M), SPIRIT ARMOR (4M), MIRROR
      IMAGE (2M), PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M), MINOR GLOBE OF
      INVULNERABILiTY then Iron Body. Have the Bard take on enemies
      alone while other spellcasters cast CLOUD OF PESTILENCE (4evilC),
      ABI-DALZIM'S HORRID WILTING (8M), SUFFOCATE (7M), CLOUDKILL (5M),
      GLYPH OF WARDING (3C), CHAIN LIGHTNING (6M), LIGHTNING BOLT (3M)
      and/or STINKING CLOUD (2M) on them (as the caster of this spell is
      immune these effects). Casting this spell will nullify the effects
      of TROLLISH FORTITUDE (6M). See also TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION (6M).


L8-05 : MIND BLANK
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Abjuration
Target : Caster
Range : Not applicable
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : Shields the caster's mind from any mental effect; making him
      immune to any charm, command, domination, fear, or feeblemind
      effects.  
Duration : 1350 rounds (or 1 day)
Avoidance : Not applicable
Obtain from :
      1. Nym's Exotic Goods, svirfneblin village via Marketh's Mines,
            Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
Comments : All-in-one mind protection spell. The spell's very long
     duration and range of protection make it a useful spell to
     memorize if you don't plan to use any other level 8 spell. If you
     plan to use this spell in combat, remember to cast MINOR GLOBE OF
     INVULNERABILITY (3M) to prevent DISPEL MAGIC (3C/3M) from
     affecting the caster. See also IMPERVIOUS SANCTITY OF THE MIND
     (7CD), CHAOTIC COMMANDS (5C), PROTECTION FROM EVIL 10' RADIUS,
     EXALTATION (3C), RESIST FEAR (2M), PROTECTION FROM EVIL (1CD/1M),
     REMOVE FEAR (1CD). 


L8-06 : MONSTER SUMMONING VI ( MONSTER SUMMONING 6 )
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .8 round
Effect : Summons 1 to 3 (average of 2) level 6 monsters under your
      control; mostly Phase Spiders, Frost Salamanders or Carrion
      Crawlers. 
Duration : [casterlevel + 7] rounds
Avoidance : Maximum 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Nym's Exotic Goods, svirfneblin village via Marketh's Mines,
            Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's Tooth)
      2. Crate, southeast of the fourth dungeon below the keep (the one
            with Jackalweres), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments : The creatures this spell summons are weak, as such they are
      only good at attacking spellcasters and perhaps distracting them.


L8-07 : POWER WORD BLIND
Spell : Mages, Bards
School : Conjuration
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : The caster utters the spell causing all hostile creatures
      within 10 feet of cast point to be blinded (-4 penalty to AC,
      -4 penalty to THAC0).
Duration : 10 rounds 
Avoidance : None
Obtain from :
      1. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
Comments : A high level weakening spell. The effects of this spell is
      similar to that of SLOW (3M), except it offers no saving throw.
      Also, if you remember that BLINDNESS (2M) has a cummulative
      effect, so the case maybe the same with this spell (although
      that's just guesswork). This is spell is useful againts strong or
      tough opponents. For really strong or tough opponents, you can use
      this spell with SYMBOL OF PAIN (7C), Slow, Blindness and/or
      ALICORN LANCE (2D) to really soften them up. Note that this spell
      has a small area of effect, so be careful of your targeting. See
      also CHILL TOUCH (1M).





---
LEVEL 9 SPELLS 


L9-01 : MONSTER SUMMONING VII ( MONSTER SUMMONING 7 )
Spell : Mages
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .9 round
Effect : Summons 1 to 2, seventh or eighth level monsters under your
      control, mostly Boneguard Skeletons or Umber Hulks. 
Duration : [casterlevel + 7] rounds
Avoidance : Maximum 6 summoned creatures limit
Obtain from :
      1. Table in Malavon's Lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
      3. Barrel near the entrance, second dungeon beneath the keep (the
            one with Beholders), Trials of the Luremaster
Comments :


L9-02 : POWER WORD KILL
Spell : Mages
School : Conjuration/ Summoning
Target : Area
Range : Sight of caster
Casting Time : .1 round
Effect : The caster utters the spell, killing hostile or neutral
      creatures within 10 feet of cast point.
            a. If there's only 1 creature in the affected area, it is
                  killed if it has 60 or less hitpoints.
            b. If there are multiple creatures in the affected area,
                  those with 30 or less hitpoints are killed until [the
                  next creature's hitpoints + sum of hitpoints of those 
                  already killed by the spell] exceeds 120.                
Duration : Instant
Avoidance : See effect
Obtain from :
      1. Chest in Malavon's Lair, Lower Dorn's Deep (through Wyrm's
            Tooth)
      2. Edion Caradoc, tower southwest of Burial Isle, Heart of Winter
      3. Bookshelf, southeast, second floor of the keep, Trials of the
            Luremaster
Comments :





---
SPECIAL THANKS : 
      Jasper Elvin C. Mijares (feared scourge of all things written,
            ancient devourer of paperbacks, ally of bookstore owners
            everywhere) for answering most of my AD&D questions, and for
            letting me borrow his AD&D stuff.
      Jade C. Mijares, for answering some AD&D questions (backup).
      Ferdinand R. Fernando (future world dictator, practices conquering
            the world on games... for now) for buying me this game cause
            I'm too lazy to do it myself, and for answering
            miscellaneous questions.
      GameFAQs.com, for posting this guide.


---
PRISTIN'S TOWER Copyright 2002 Avielh Aleczis M. Tolentino.
All other trademarks and copyrights are property of their respective
owners.

